REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 409 OF 2022
Dr. Astha Goel and Ors.  …Appellant(s)
Versus
The Medical Counselling Committee & Ors.           …Respondent(s)
WITH
WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 393 OF 2022
Dr. Atharv Tungatkar and Ors.  …Appellant(s)
Versus
The Medical Consulting Committee & Ors.           …Respondent(s)
WITH
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 10395 OF 2022
Dr. Nikhil Arora      …Appellant(s)
Versus
Union of India & Ors.           …Respondent(s)
AND
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 10539 OF 2022
Dr. Khundongbam Chetan      …Appellant(s)
Versus
Union of India & Ors.           …Respondent(s)
1O R D E R
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.As common question of law and facts arise in this group of writ
petitions/special  leave  petitions,  they  are  being  disposed  of  by  this
common order.
2.For the sake of convenience, Writ Petition (C) No.409 of 2022-
Dr. Astha Goel and Ors. Vs. The Medical Counselling Committee & Ors.
is treated as the lead matter.  By way of this writ petition being Writ
Petition No. 409 of 2022 under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, the
seven petitioners have prayed for the following reliefs:-
“a)Issue an Appropriate Writ, Order or Direction, in the
nature of a Writ of Mandamus, under Article 32 of the
Constitution to direct Respondent No. 1 to provide the
exact number of vacant seats after the conduct of stray
vacancy round of AIQ; 
b) Issue an Appropriate Writ, Order or Direction, in the
nature of a Writ of Mandamus, under Article 32 of the
Constitution to direct Respondent No. 1 to conduct a
Special  Stray  Round  of  counselling  to  allow  the
candidates to participate for the vacant seats which are
available after the conduct of stray vacancy round of
AIQ;
xxxxxxx”
23.In Writ Petition (C) No. 393 of 2022, one additional prayer is made
to issue an appropriate writ, direction or order directing the respondent
Nos. 1 and 2 – The Medical Consulting Committee and the Union of
India to revert the Medical P.G. seats remaining vacant after the AIQ
stray vacancy round as regards the admissions conducted pursuant to
NEET-PG-2021  examination  to  the  State  Quotas,  for  being  allotted
through State Mop-Up Rounds. 
4.The petitioners of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10395 of 2022
and  Special  Leave  Petition  (C)  No.  10539  of  2022  approached  the
respective High Courts for the very reliefs, which are now sought in the
aforesaid writ petitions, namely directing the respondents to conduct a
Special Stray Round of counselling so as to allow them to participate for
the vacant seats, which are available after the conduct of stray vacancy
round of AIQ.  By the impugned orders, the respective High Courts have
dismissed  the  writ  petitions,  hence  the  original  writ  petitioners  have
preferred the present special leave petitions.   
5.The dispute is with respect to the admissions for NEET-PG-2021.
Around 40,000 seats were available for NEET-PG examination, which
included the clinical as well as non-clinical seats.  92,000 candidates/
doctors  were  initially  eligible  for  examination  for  the  said  seats.
3However, subsequently, the percentage was lowered by communication
dated 12.05.2022 and another 25,000 candidates became eligible.  
5.1The NEET-PG examination was conducted on 11.09.2021. The
result  was  declared  on  28.09.2021.   As  per  the  earlier  counselling
scheme, there were two rounds of counselling for All India Seats as well
as  State  Quotas  seats  respectively.   However,  as  per  the  modified
counselling scheme, counselling is to be carried in four rounds and no
seats were to be reverted to States.  These four rounds were AIQ Round
1, AIQ Round 2, AIQ Mop-up Round and AIQ Stray Vacancy Round.  
5.2That for NEET-PG-2021, Round 1 was held on 12.01.2022, Round
2 was held on 05.02.2022, Mop-Up Round was held on 14.04.2022 and
final Stray Round started on 28.04.2022 and ended on 07.05.2022.  At
the end of the four rounds of counselling, each for All India Quota and
State Quotas (in all eight rounds of counselling) and thereafter one
another round of  counselling was  conducted,  and still  approximately
1456 seats remain vacant.  
5.3The  respective  petitioners,  who  earlier  participated  in  all  the
counsellings and could not get the admissions have now approached
this Court by way of present writ petitions/special leave petitions praying
for Special Stray Round of counselling with respect to the remaining
1456 seats remained vacant and to allow them to participate for the
4vacant seats, which are available after the conduct of the Stray vacancy
round of AIQ.
  
6.Ms. Rachna Shrivastava, learned Senior Advocate has appeared
on behalf of the writ petitioners of Writ Petition (C) No. 409 of 2022; Shri
A.D.N. Rao, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the
petitioner in Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10395 of 2022; Shri Avijit
Mani Tripathi, learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the petitioner
in  Special  Leave  Petition  (C)  No.  10539  of  2022  and  Shri  Kunal
Cheema, learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the writ petitioner in
Writ Petition (C) No.393 of 2022.  Shri Balbir Singh, learned Additional
Solicitor General has appeared on behalf of the Union of India and Shri
Gaurav Sharma, learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the Medical
Counselling Committee as well as the National Board of Examinations. 
7.Learned  Senior  Advocates/counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
respective petitioners have made following submissions in support of
their prayer to direct the respondents to conduct a Special Stray Round
of counselling with respect to the seats which have remained vacant:-
(i)Total 1456 seats have remained vacant for NEET-PG-2021,
wastage  of  1456  seats  still  hamper  the  interest  of  both
colleges and the candidates; 
(ii)The  respective  petitioners  –  candidates  are  ready  to  get
admission on any of the seats remained vacant;
5(iii)Due to abrupt addition of additional seats in NEET-PG-2021,
an  additional  round  of  counselling  for  146  seats  was
conducted pursuant to the order passed by this Court.  Apart
from this, the Mop-Up round was cancelled and was directed
to be reconducted.  Therefore, the point of four counselling
cannot be brought when due to severe glitches additional
rounds were already conducted;
(iv)Out of 1456 seats remaining vacant, there are many seats,
which are clinical seats also.  Therefore, it is not correct to
say  that  the  seats,  which  have  remained  vacant  are  of
Paramedical courses;
(v)The  seats  which  have  remained  vacant  have  remained
vacant due to the non-joining, resignation and the candidates
not reported.  It is submitted that therefore, it was the duty
cast  upon  the  respondents  to  fill  up  the  posts  remained
vacant due to the aforesaid grounds from and amongst the
remaining candidates; 
(vi)It is the duty of the Medical Counselling Committee to have
conducted  an  additional  round  keeping  in  view  the  large
number of seats (1456) remaining vacant;
(vii)Closing of the software before filling of those seats itself is
not justifiable.  Even if the software is closed, looking at the
gravity and urgency, a mechanism can be developed to fill in
the vacant seats;     
6(viii)That the submission on behalf of the Medical Counselling
Committee  and  the  Union  of  India  that  the  respective
candidates have already been refunded the amount cannot
be  a  ground  not  to  conduct  an  additional  round  of
counselling;
(ix)The candidates for NEET-PG-2021 and 2022 are different.
Many  candidates,  who  participated  in  the  counselling  for
NEET-PG-2021 did not even register for NEET-PG-2022 with
a  hope  that  they  will  get  a  seat  in  the  counselling.
Registration for NEET-PG-2022 has already been closed on
25.03.2022, giving no room to the candidates for NEET-PG-
2021 to appear for the NEET-PG-2022;
(x)The candidates cannot be replaced for NEET-PG-2021 and
NEET-PG-2022, 1456 seats can only be open for a merit-
based competition for NEET-PG-2021;
(xi)If the candidates like the petitioners are given the admissions
on the seats remaining vacant now, it may not affect their
education.  Even the classes of NEET-PG-2021 started even
much  before  the  first  counselling  batch  started.   That
thereafter and after the courses started, there are three Mop-
Up  Rounds  conducted  and  the  students  are  given
admissions and the last admission was given on 07.05.2022.
The students, who are given admissions now will be able to
complete their full studies.
7Making above submissions, it is urged and prayed to direct
the respondents to conduct a Special Stray Round of counselling
as a one-time measure and as a special case.     
8.Present petitions/special leave petitions are vehemently opposed
by Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the Union of
India and Shri Gaurav Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the Medical Counselling Committee.  A counter is filed on behalf of the
respondent Nos. 1 and 3 – Union of India/ Director General of Health
Services.  
8.1It is vehemently submitted by Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG that
in the present case, the dispute is with respect to the NEET-PG-2021
seats.  It is submitted that in the present case, four rounds of counselling
each for All India Quota and State’s Quotas have been carried out and
out of 40,000 seats only 1456 seats have remained vacant after in all
nine  rounds  of  counselling.   It  is  submitted  that  out  of  1456  seats
remaining vacant, approximately, 1100 seats are with respect to non-
clinical courses and the remaining seats are with respect to the private
colleges and with respect to the clinical courses.  It is submitted that all
those seats have remained vacant, which usually remain vacant every
year as they are no takers and/or they can be said to be rejected seats.
It is submitted that all those seats remain vacant every year and, in
8many cases, they are not opted by the concerned candidate as nobody
like to opt for non-clinical courses and even with respect to some of the
clinical courses, as there is a high fee in the private colleges, they are no
takers and therefore, some of the seats are remaining vacant every year.
It  is  submitted  that  therefore  even  after  one  additional  round  of
counselling is carried out as requested by the petitioners, in that case
also the seats are bound to remain vacant.  It is submitted that there
cannot be endless exercise of conducting counseling one after another
till all the seats are filled in.  It is submitted that after the nine rounds of
counselling  when  some  of  the  seats  have  remained  vacant  and
considering the fact that the PG courses (clinical) is three-years course,
out of which, for whatever reason, more than one year had gone and
there cannot be any compromise so far as the Medical Education is
concerned  and  considering  the  fact  that  the  admission  process  for
NEET-PG-2022 has already begun and the counselling for NEET-PG-
2022 is to begin/start in July, 2022, a conscious decision has been taken
not to conduct one another Special Stray Round of counselling. 
8.2It is further submitted on behalf of the Union of India and the
Medical Counselling Committee that the last round of counselling ended
on 07.05.2022.  That thereafter, the entire software mechanism has
been closed and the security deposit has also been refunded to the
eligible candidates.  It is submitted that a significant proportion of seats,
9which remain vacant are in non-clinical courses and these are no taker
seats, which seats generally remain vacant.  It is submitted that every
year, some number of seats remain vacant.  It is submitted that the
identical question came to be considered by this Court in the case of
Education Promotion Society for India and Anr. Vs. Union of India
and Ors., (2019) 7 SCC 38.   It is submitted that before this Hon’ble
Court, the petitioners prayed for general extension of time and prayed for
additional Mop-Up Round of counselling on the ground that a large
number of seats for PG courses were lying vacant.  It is submitted that in
the said decision after taking note of the fact that every year, large
number of  non-clinical  seats remain vacant because  many  graduate
doctors do not want to do postgraduation in non-clinical subjects, it is
observed that merely because the seats are lying vacant is not a ground
to grant extension of time and grant further opportunity to fill up vacant
seats. It is submitted that in the aforesaid decision, it is observed that the
schedule must be followed and if the violation of schedule is permitted
and extension is granted, it will be opening a pandora’s box and the
whole purpose of fixing a time schedule and laying down a regime which
strictly adheres to the time schedule will be defeated.     
8.3Shri Gaurav Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
Medical Counselling Committee and the National Board of Examinations
has also relied upon the earlier decision of this Court in the case of
10Supreet Batra and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors., (2003) 3 SCC
370  in support of his submission that even if some seats remained
vacant, the students cannot be admitted mid-term.  
8.4Making above submission, it is prayed to dismiss the present writ
petitions/special leave petitions. 
9.Heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties at
length.
 
10.At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present case, the
dispute is with respect to the NEET-PG-2021 and the time schedule for
the approved counselling has been fixed pursuant to the direction issued
by this Court and/or approved by this Court.  Ordinarily, the first round of
counselling  in  PG  courses  begins  in  the  month  of  March  of  every
academic year and subsequently the academic session begins from the
month  of  May  of  every  academic  year.   However,  NEET-PG-2021
examination was delayed due to the third wave of COVID-19 pandemic
and various litigations across the nation implementing the 27% OBC
reservation in AIQ seats.    
10.1At this stage, it is required to be noted that as per the earlier
counselling policy, only two rounds of counselling were being held for All
India  Quota  seats  and  State  Quotas.   The  modified  scheme  of
11counselling for Academic Year 2021-2022 and onwards was submitted
before this Court in Special Leave Petition (C) No.10487 of 2021 and
this  Court  approved  the  same.   As  per  the  modified  scheme  of
counselling, this time four rounds of counselling have been undertaken
for All India Quota seats as well as States’ Quotas each.  That thereafter
one  another  round  of  counselling  was  conducted  pursuant  to  the
subsequent order passed by this Court, as  approximately 146 seats
were  added.   The  NEET-PG-2021  counselling  commenced  on
12.01.2022 and after completion of the four rounds of counselling for All
India Quota seats and State Quotas (in all eight rounds of counselling),
out of 40,000 seats, 1456 seats have remained vacant.  It appears that
out of 1456 seats approximately more than 1100 seats are with respect
to the non-clinical courses and the remaining are with respect to the
clinical  courses  and  all  the  seats  are  with  respect  to  the  private
institutions.  The respective petitioners are claiming admission on the
remaining vacant seats and have prayed to direct the respondents to
conduct a Special Stray Round of counselling.  The main submission on
behalf of the petitioners, as noted hereinabove, is that as large number
of seats have remained vacant, the same be filled in by conducting
additional/Special Stray Round of counselling for the seats remaining
vacant, which  are mostly non-clinical courses, which remained even
after eight or nine rounds of counselling.  The students cannot still pray
12for admission on those seats remaining vacant after approximately one
year  of  academic  session  and  remaining  vacant  after  eight  or  nine
rounds of counselling. 
10.2At this stage, the decisions of this Court in the case of  Supreet
Batra and Ors. (supra)  and  Education Promotion Society for India
and Anr. (supra) are required to be referred to. 
In the case of Supreet Batra and Ors. (supra) , it is observed and
held that even if some seats remain vacant, the students cannot be
admitted mid-term.  In paragraph 7, it is observed and held as under:-
“7. When  a  detailed  scheme  has  been  framed  through
orders of this Court and the manner in which it has to be
worked out is also indicated therein, we do not think that if in
a particular year there is any shortfall or a certain number of
seats are not filled up, the same should be done by adopting
one more round of counselling because there is no scope for
the third round of counselling under the Scheme. It would not
be advisable to go on altering the Scheme as and when
seats are vacant. What is to be borne in mind is that broad
equality will have to be achieved and not that it should result
in any mathematical exactitude. Out of about 1600 seats, if
200 seats are not filled up for various reasons and such not-
filled-up seats were much less in the earlier years, we do not
think it should result in the third round of counselling. If that
process is to be adopted then there will be again vacancies
and further filling up of the seats falling vacant will have to be
undertaken. In that process, it will become endless until all
the seats under the all-India quota are filled up. That is not
the  object  of  the  Scheme  formulated  by  this  Court.  The
object was to achieve a broad-based equality as indicated by
us at the outset and we do not think that any steps have to
13be taken for altering the Scheme. We have taken identical
view in the decision in  Neelu Arora  v. Union of India  [(2003)
3 SCC 366] and connected matters disposed of on 24-1-
2003.  Moreover,  this  Court  in  Medical  Council  of
India v. Madhu Singh  [(2002) 7 SCC 258] has taken the view
that there is no scope for admitting students midstream as
that would be against the very spirit of statutes governing
medical education. Even if seats are unfilled that cannot be a
ground for making mid-session admissions and there cannot
be telescoping of unfilled seats of one year with permitted
seats of the subsequent year. If these aspects are borne in
mind,  we  do  not  think  any  reliefs  as  sought  for  by  the
petitioners can be granted under these petitions. These writ
petitions shall stand dismissed.”
10.3In the case of Education Promotion Society for India and Anr.
(supra),  the  writ  petitioners  like  the  petitioners  in  the  present  case
prayed for extension of time schedule and prayed for the additional
counselling.  This Court negated the same.  This Court also took the
note of the fact that every year large number of non-clinical seats remain
vacant  because  many  graduate  doctors  do  not  want  to  do
postgraduation in non-clinical subjects. Thereafter, it is observed and
held that merely because the seats are lying vacant, is not a ground to
grant extension of time and grant further opportunity to fill up vacant
seats. It is observed that the schedule must be followed. While holding
so, it is observed in paragraph 6 as under:-
“6. In this case the petitioners want a general extension of
time not on account of any particular difficulty faced by any
individual college or university but generally on the ground
that a large number of seats for the PG courses are lying
14vacant.  It  is  stated  that  more  than  1000  seats  are  lying
vacant. In the affidavit filed by the UoI it is mentioned that as
far  as  deemed  universities  are  concerned  there  are  603
seats lying vacant. However, it is important to note that out of
603 seats lying vacant only 31 are in clinical subjects and
the vast majority (572) that is almost 95% of the seats are
lying vacant in non-clinical subjects. There is no material on
record to show as to what is the situation with regard to the
remaining  400-500  seats.  This  Court  however  can  take
judicial notice of the fact that every year large number of
non-clinical  seats  remain  vacant  because  many  graduate
doctors  do  not  want  to  do  postgraduation  in  non-clinical
subjects. Merely because the seats are lying vacant, in our
view, is not a ground to grant extension of time and grant
further opportunity to fill up vacant seats. The schedule must
be followed. If we permit violation of schedule and grant
extension, we shall be opening a pandora's box and the
whole purpose of fixing a time schedule and laying down a
regime  which  strictly  adheres  to  time  schedule  will  be
defeated.”
10.4 Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid two
decisions  to  the  facts  of  the  case  on  hand  and  when  the  Medical
Counselling Committee and the Union of India have to adhere to the
time  schedule  for  completing  the  admission  process  and  when  the
current admission of NEET-PG-2021 is already behind time schedule
and ever after conducting eight to nine rounds of counselling, still some
seats, which are mainly non-clinical courses seats have remained vacant
and  thereafter  when  a  conscious  decision  is  taken  by  the  Union
Government/the  Medical  Counselling  Committee,  not  to  conduct  a
further Special Stray Round of counselling, it cannot be said that the
same  is  arbitrary.   The  decision  of  the  Union  Government  and  the
Medical  Counselling Committee not to have Special Stray Round of
15counselling is in the interest of Medical Education and Public Health.
There  cannot  be  any  compromise  with  the  merits  and/or  quality  of
Medical Education, which may ultimately affect the Public Health.    
10.5The process of admission and that too in the medical education
cannot be endless.  It must end at a particular point of time. The time
schedule has to be adhered to, otherwise, ultimately, it may affect the
medical education and the public health. 
10.6Apart  from  the  fact  that  after  closure  of  the  last  round  of
counselling on 07.05.2022, the entire software mechanism has been
closed and the security deposit is refunded to the eligible candidates, it
is  to  be  noted  that  the  admission  process  for  NEET-PG-2022  has
already begun, the results for the NEET-PG-2022 has been announced
on 01.06.2022 and as per the time schedule, the counselling process is
going to start in July, 2022.  Therefore, if one additional Special Stray
Round of counselling is conducted now, as prayed, in that case, it may
affect the admission process for NEET-PG-2022.  
10.7At the cost of repetition, it is observed and held that even after
eight to nine rounds of counselling, out of 40,000 seats, 1456 seats have
remained vacant, out of which approximately, more than 1100 seats are
non-clinical seats, which every year remain vacant, of which the judicial
16notice  has  been  taken  by  this  Court  in  the  case  of  Education
Promotion Society for India and Anr. (supra)      
11.In  view  of  the  above  and  for  the  reasons  stated  above,  the
petitioners are not entitled to any relief of writ of Mandamus directing the
respondents to conduct a Special Stray Round of counselling for filling
up the remaining vacant seats of NEET-PG-2021.  Granting of such
relief now may affect the medical education and ultimately the public
health as observed hereinabove. 
12.Under the circumstances, both these writ petitions and the special
leave petitions deserve to be dismissed and are accordingly dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no
order as to costs.    
………………………………….J.
                         [M.R. SHAH]
NEW DELHI;                  ………………………………….J.
JUNE 10, 2022.                                [ANIRUDDHA BOSE]
17