REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4522­4524   OF 2022
(@ DIARY NO. 16486/2022)
THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH            APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
RAGHU RAMAKRISHNA RAJU 
KANUMURU (M.P.)           RESPONDENT(S)
                           
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
Permission to file appeal without certified/plain copy
of impugned order is granted.
Issue notice.
Shri Balaji Srinivasan, learned counsel accepts notice
on behalf of the sole respondent, and as such, we have heard
the matter finally.
1.The appellant challenges the order dated 6th May 2022
passed by the National Green Tribunal, Principal Bench, New
1Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the “NGT”) in O.A. No.361 of
2021,   vide   which   it   prohibited   the   appellant   from
undertaking   any   further   construction.   The   appellant   also
challenges the order dated 20th  May 2022 passed by the
learned NGT in I.A. Nos. 117 and 118 of 2022 in O.A. No.
361 of 2022, vide which the application seeking vacation of
stay imposed vide order dated 6th May 2022 was rejected.
2.The   appellant   was   already   running   a   resort   at
Rushikonda   Hill,   near   Visakhapatnam.     According   to   the
appellant, after obtaining the necessary permission, it has
demolished   the  existing   resort   and   is   re­constructing  the
resort at the same place with additional facilities.  
3.A   writ   petition   being   W.P.   (P.I.L.)   No.241   of   2021,
challenging   the   said   construction,   has   already   been   filed
before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Amaravati.  In
the said writ petition, the Division Bench of the High Court
has passed the following order on 16th December 2021:
“In the meanwhile, the construction activities
and   other   allied   activities   in   relation   to   the
subject   project,   if   any   undertaken,   shall   be
strictly   in   accordance   with   the   permission
accorded   by   the   Ministry   of   Environment,
2Forest   and   Climate   Change,   as   well   as   the
existing master plan.”
4.It appears that the aforesaid writ petition before the
High Court was filed on 8th  December 2021.   However, a
letter addressed by the respondent was sent on 31st October
2021 to the learned NGT. The respondent is a sitting Member
of Parliament from one of the constituencies in the State of
Andhra Pradesh. The learned NGT, after taking cognizance of
the said letter, initiated the proceedings in O.A. No.361 of
2021.   It further appears from the record that the learned
NGT had appointed an Experts Committee on 17th December
2021 which submitted its Report on 29th  March 2022.   A
perusal of the said report would reveal that the said Experts
Committee   consisting   of   four   experts   did   not   find   any
violation in the construction that was carried out by the
appellant.
5.However, the learned NGT again, vide its order dated 6th
May 2022, appointed a 2nd Experts Committee. The report of
the said 2nd  Experts Committee is still awaited.   However,
without waiting for the said report, by the same order, the
3learned   NGT   directed   that   no   further   construction   to   be
undertaken.
6.It appears that after the order dated 6th May 2022 was
passed by the learned NGT, the appellant filed an application
for vacating stay on construction as directed in the said
interim order dated 6th May 2022 passed by the learned NGT.
However, the same was also rejected by the learned NGT vide
its   order   dated   20th  May   2022.     Both   these   orders   are
impugned in the present appeals.
7.Dr.   Abhishek   Manu   Singhvi,  learned   Senior  Counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant, submitted that when
the   High   Court   of   competent   jurisdiction   was   already   in
seisin   of   the   matter,   the   learned   NGT   could   not   have
entertained a lis with regard to the same cause of action.  He
submitted that though this fact was brought to the notice of
the   learned   NGT,  the   learned   NGT   refused  to   vacate  the
interim order dated 6th May 2022, which was in conflict with
the order of the High Court dated 16th December 2021.  
8.Dr. Singhvi submitted that NGT is a Tribunal, which is
subordinate to the High Court in so far as the territorial
4jurisdiction of the High Court is concerned.   He, therefore,
submitted   that   the   very   continuation   of   the   proceedings
before the learned NGT is not sustainable in law.
9.Shri Balaji Srinivasan, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondent, on the contrary, submitted that the
appellant has acted in gross breach of the order dated 16th
December 2021 passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh
at   Amravati.   He   submitted   that   the   construction   is
rampantly going on in blatant violation of the order of the
High Court. Contempt petition has already been filed before
the   High   Court,   wherein   the   High   Court   after   taking
cognizance of the blatant violation, issued notice on 4th May
2022.
10.This Court, in the case of  Priya Gupta and Another v.
Additional   Secretary,   Ministry   of   Health   and   Family
Welfare and Others1, has observed thus:
“12. The government departments are no exception
to the consequences of wilful disobedience of the
orders of the Court. Violation of the orders of the
Court would be its disobedience and would invite
action in accordance with law. The orders passed by
this Court are the law of the land in terms of Article
1 (2013) 11 SCC 404
5141   of   the   Constitution   of   India.   No   Court   or
Tribunal and for that matter any other authority
can   ignore   the   law   stated   by   this   Court.   Such
obedience would also be conducive to their smooth
working, otherwise there would be confusion in the
administration of law and the respect for law would
irretrievably suffer. There can be no hesitation in
holding that the law declared by the higher court in
the State is binding on authorities and tribunals
under its superintendence and they cannot ignore
it. This Court also expressed the view that it had
become necessary to reiterate that disrespect to the
constitutional ethos and breach of discipline have a
grave impact on the credibility of judicial institution
and   encourages   chance   litigation.   It   must   be
remembered   that   predictability   and   certainty   are
important   hallmarks   of   judicial   jurisprudence
developed in this country, as discipline is sine qua
non   for   effective   and   efficient   functioning   of   the
judicial system. If the Courts command others to
act   in   accordance   with   the   provisions   of   the
Constitution and to abide by the rule of law, it is not
possible   to   countenance   violation   of   the
constitutional principle by those who are required to
lay   down   the   law.   [Ref.   East   India   Commercial
Companies Ltd. v. Collector of Customs [AIR 1962
SC   1893]  and   Official  Liquidator   v.  Dayanand   &
Ors. [(2008) 10 SCC 1]”
11.In any case, no law is necessary to state that insofar as
the Tribunals are concerned, they would be subordinate to
the High Court insofar as the territorial jurisdiction of the
High Court is concerned.   A reference in this respect was
also made to the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this
6Court in the case of  L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India
and Others2. 
12.We are, therefore, of the considered view that it was not
appropriate on the part of the learned NGT to have continued
with   the   proceedings   before   it,   specifically,   when   it   was
pointed that the High Court was also in seisin of the matter
and   had   passed   an   interim   order   permitting   the
construction.  The conflicting orders passed by the learned
NGT   and   the   High   Court   would   lead   to   an   anomalous
situation,   where   the   authorities   would   be   faced   with   a
difficulty as to which order they are required to follow.  There
can be no manner of doubt that in such a situation, it is the
orders passed by the constitutional courts, which would be
prevailing over the orders passed by the statutory tribunals.
13.In that view of the matter, we are of the considered view
that the continuation of the proceedings before the learned
NGT for the same cause of action, which is seized with the
High Court, would not be in the interest of justice. 
14.We,   therefore,   quash   and   set   aside   the   proceedings
2 (1995) 1 SCC 400
7pending before the learned NGT in O.A. No.361 of 2021.
15.We   further   find   that   taking   into   consideration   the
serious   allegations   made   by   the   respondent,   it   will   be
appropriate that all these facts are placed before the High
Court   and   the   High   Court   considers   passing   appropriate
orders  in   accordance  with   law   so   as  to   strike  a   balance
between the development and the environmental issues.
16.Needless to state that though development is necessary
for economical progress of the nation, it is equally necessary
to safeguard the environment so as to preserve pollution free
environment and ecology for the future generations to come.
17.We, therefore, find that it will be appropriate that the
parties move the High Court for appropriate orders.   The
respondent   would   be   at   liberty   to   file   an   application   for
impleadment   before   the   High   Court   in   the   pending
proceedings, which would be considered by the High Court
in accordance with law.
18.Though, the High Court has permitted construction to
proceed in accordance with law, we find that till the High
Court takes a fresh call on the said issue, it will be necessary
8to issue the following direction:
(a)Until   the   High   Court   considers   the   issue,   the
construction will be permitted only on the area
where the construction existed earlier and which
has been demolished and the flat area.
19.Dr. Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf
of the State, on instructions from Shri Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki,
stated that the appellant would not claim any equities on
account   of   the   construction,   which   is   permitted   to   be
proceeded further.
20.We   further   clarify   that   we   have   not   expressed   any
opinion on the merits of the matter and the parties would be
at liberty to raise all the issues available to them before the
High Court which shall be considered in accordance with
law.     Since   the   learned   NGT   has   already   constituted   an
Experts Committee, the High Court would be at liberty to
take   into   consideration   the   report   of   the   said   Experts
Committee   or   if   it   finds   appropriate   may   appoint   other
Committee as it deems fit.
21.The   appeals   stand   disposed   of   in   the   above   terms.
9Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
  
…..................... J.  
(B.R. GAVAI )  
…..................... J.  
(HIMA KOHLI)  
NEW DELHI;       
June 01, 2022.
10ITEM NO.3           COURT NO.5               SECTION XVII
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
CIVIL APPEAL Diary No(s). 16486/2022
(Arising out of impugned Interim order dated  06-05-2022 
in OA No. 361/2021 20-05-2022 in IA No. 117/2022 20-05-
2022 in IA No. 118/2022 passed by the National Green 
Tribunal)
THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH                 Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
RAGHU RAMAKRISHNA RAJU KANUMURU (M.P)      Respondent(s)
(IA No.80661/2022-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE 
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT and IA No.80659/2022-STAY APPLICATION 
and IA No.80658/2022-PERMISSION TO FILE SLP WITHOUT 
CERTIFIED/PLAIN COPY OF IMPUGNED ORDER and IA 
No.81808/2022-PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL 
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES )
 
Date : 01-06-2022 These appeals were called on for hearing 
today.
CORAM : 
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.R. GAVAI
         HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
(VACATION BENCH)
For Petitioner(s) Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
Mr. S. Niranjan Reddy, Sr. Adv.
                    Mr. Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki, AOR
            Mr. Polanki Gowtham, Advocate
Mr. Shaik Mohamad Haneef, Adv
Mr. T. Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy, Adv
Mr. K.V.Girish Chowdary, Adv
Ms. Rajeswari Mukherjee, Adv
Ms. Akhila Palem, Adv
Mr. Abhishek Sharma, Adv
Mr. Sahil Raveen, Adv
       
For Respondent(s) Mr. Balaji Srinivasan, AOR
                    
11    UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                            O R D E R
Permission to file appeal without certified/plain
copy of impugned order is granted.
Issue notice.
Shri  Balaji  Srinivasan,  learned  counsel  accepts
notice on behalf of the sole respondent.
The appeals stand disposed of in terms of the
signed Reportable Judgment. Pending application(s), if
any, shall also stand disposed of.
(Geeta Ahuja)                           (Ranjana Shailey)
Assistant Registrar-cum-PS                 Court Master
(Signed Reportable Judgment is placed on the file)
12