REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO._4515 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.10427 of
2022]
ARDHENDU KUMAR DAS     ...APPELLANT(S)
 
VERSUS
THE STATE OF ODISHA AND ORS.  ...RESPONDENT(S)
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.4516 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.10428 of
2022]
JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.Both   these   petitions   challenge   the   interlocutory   order
dated 9th May, 2022, passed by the Division Bench of the High
Court of Orissa at Cuttack, in Writ Petition (Civil) No.6257 of
2022,   wherein   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court   has
1recorded   certain   submissions   and   statements   made   by   the
learned Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State of
Odisha and directed the matter to be posted on 22nd June, 2022
along with Writ Petition (Civil) No. 10153 of 2022.   From the
tenor of the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the
petitioners, it appears that they are basically aggrieved since
the High Court has not granted an interim order restraining the
respondents from proceeding further with the construction.  
2.The factual background leading to the filing of the present
proceedings is thus:
3.A   Public   Interest   Litigation   being   Writ   Petition   (Civil)
No.6257 of 2022 came to be filed before the High Court of
Orissa   by   one   Dillip   Kumar   Baral   challenging   the   alleged
unsanctioned   and  unauthorised   construction   activities
undertaken   by   the   respondent   Nos.   1   and   2   within   the
prohibited   area   of   the   Shree   Jagannath   Temple   complex   in
contravention of the provisions of The Ancient Monuments and
2Archaeological   Sites   and   Remains   Act,   1958   (hereinafter
referred to as “the said Act”) 
4.It appears that initially the said writ petition was listed
before the Division Bench of the High Court on 8th April, 2022,
on   which   date,   certain   statements   made   by   the   learned
Advocate General were taken on record.   Subsequently, when
the matter was listed on 21st April, 2022, certain further orders
came to be passed.   Subsequently, the order dated 9th  May,
2022 has been passed by the High Court, which is impugned in
the present Special Leave Petitions.  
5.The   petitioner­Ardhendu   Kumar   Das   in   Special   Leave
Petition (Civil) Diary No.16718 of 2022 is not the petitioner
before the High Court.   However, he claims to be an ardent
devotee   of   Lord   Jagannath   and   therefore,   had   filed   an
Intervention   Application   before   the   High   Court,   which   is
pending consideration.   The petitioner has therefore filed an
Interlocutory Application seeking permission to file the present
3Special Leave Petition challenging the order dated 9th May, 2022
of the Division Bench of the High Court.
6.The petitioner­Sumanta Kumar Ghadei in Special Leave
Petition (Civil) Diary No.17078 of 2022 is also not the petitioner
before the High Court.   The said petitioner had also filed an
Intervention Application in the writ petition before the High
Court,   which   is   pending   adjudication.     The   said   petitioner
claims to be a social activist and businessman, who is a devotee
of Lord Jagannath and also claims to have done research and
has keen interest in ancient monuments and sculptures of the
State.
7.Taking   into   consideration   the   fact   that   larger   issues
involving   public   interest   are   involved,   we   allow   the   said
applications for permission to file Special Leave Petitions.  We
also grant leave in both these Special Leave Petitions.  
8.An impleadment application has been filed by Raghunath
Gochhikar   and   others,   who   claim   to   be   Sevayats.     The
applicants support the stand of the State Government. We are
4inclined to allow their application and permit them to intervene.
It is ordered accordingly. 
9.We have heard Ms. Mahalakshmi Pavani, learned Senior
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant­Ardhendu Kumar
Das, Mr. Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf   of   the   appellant­Sumanta   Kumar   Ghadei,   Mr.   Ashok
Parija, learned Advocate General for State of Odisha, Mr. Kapil
Sibal and Mr. Pinaki Mishra, learned Senior Counsel appearing
on   behalf   of   the   respondent­State,   Mr.   A.D.N.   Rao,   learned
Senior   Counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   Archaeological
Survey of India (“ASI” for short), Mr. Swetaretu Mishra, learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 5 to 7­
Shree   Jagannath   Temple   Managing   Committee   and   Mr.   Pai
Amit,   learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the
applicants/interveners/impleaders.   
10.Ms. Mahalakshmi Pavani, learned Senior Counsel submits
that in view of sub­section (4) of Section 20A of the said Act, no
permission can be granted for carrying out any public work or
5project essential to the public or other constructions in any
prohibited area on and after the date on which the Ancient
Monuments   and   Archaeological   Sites   and   Remains
(Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010 receives the assent of
the   President.   Ms.   Pavani   further   submitted   that   the
communication   dated  5th  February,   2022,  addressed  by  the
Conservation Assistant, ASI, to the Sr. Project Manager, OBCC,
would show that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were carrying out
unauthorised construction within the prohibited area of the
Centrally   Protected   Monument   of   Shree   Jagannath   Temple.
She further submits that the inspection report would reveal
that there are serious irregularities in the work carried out by
the respondents­State.   She further submits that voluminous
excavation is being done  near the  Temple, which  would be
hazardous to the Temple, which is an old structure.   
11.Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel submits that
insofar as the so­called “No Objection Certificate” (“NOC” for
short) issued by the National Monuments Authority (“NMA” for
6short)   dated   4th  September,   2021,   is   concerned,   the   said
Authority   has   no   authority   in   law   to   permit   construction.
Relying on the provisions of Section 20­I of the said Act, he
submits that NMA is only a recommendatory authority and has
no authority in law to permit any construction either in the
prohibited area or in the regulated area.   He further submits
that   if   any   construction   activity   is   to   be   undertaken   in   a
prohibited area, the same has to be undertaken only by the ASI
and by no other authority.  
12.Both   the   learned   counsel   therefore   submit   that   it   is
necessary to injunct the respondents­State from carrying out
any further construction activity during the pendency of the
present appeals.
13.Shri Ashok Parija, learned Advocate General, submits that
under   clause   (da)   of   Section   2   of   the   said   Act,   the   word
“Authority”   has   been   defined   to   mean   the   NMA   constituted
under Section 20F.  He submits that clause (db) of Section 2 of
the said Act defines “competent authority” to mean an officer
7not below the rank of Director of archaeology or Commissioner
of archaeology of the Central or State Government or equivalent
rank, specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, as the
competent authority by the Central Government.  He submits
that   the   Government   of   India   vide   Notification   dated   13th
February, 2012, in exercise of the powers conferred by the
proviso to clause (db) of Section 2 of the said Act has notified
Director,   Culture,   Department   of   Tourism   and   Culture
(Culture),   Government   of   Odisha,   Bhubaneshwar   as   the
“competent authority” for the State of Odisha for the purpose of
Sections 20C and 20D of the said Act.  The learned Advocate
General further submits that “grant of permission by competent
authority” is regulated by Section 20D of the said Act.   He
further submits that in view of the provisions of Section 20D of
the said Act, the competent authority for the State of Odisha
had made an application for grant of NOC to NMA.  NMA vide
order dated 4th September, 2021 granted its NOC for carrying
8out various works within the prohibited area and the regulated
area.  
14.The   learned   Advocate   General   further   submitted   that
clause (dc) of Section 2 of the said Act defines “construction”.
He submits  that  the  definition  specifically  excludes  any  re­
construction, repair and renovation of an existing structure or
building, or, construction, maintenance and cleansing of drains
and drainage works and of public latrines, urinals and similar
conveniences, or, the construction and maintenance of works
meant   for   providing   supply   of   water   for   public,   or,   the
construction   or   maintenance,   extension,   management   for
supply and distribution of electricity to the public or provision
for similar facilities for public. 
15.The learned Advocate General further submitted that the
three­Judge   Bench   of   this   Court   in   the   case   of   Mrinalini
Padhi vs. Union of India and others1 has itself found that it
was necessary to construct separate toilets for male and female.
1 (2019) 18 SCC 1
9He further submitted that this Court in the said case itself has
directed   ASI   to   cooperate   and   to   permit   the   activities   of
improvement which are necessary for providing facilities to the
public at large.
16.Mr. Pinaki Mishra, learned Senior Counsel, submits that
taking   into   consideration   the   fact   that   there   was   serious
inconvenience to the devotees who throng in lakhs during the
Rath Yatra period, it was found necessary that the area within
the radius of 75 meters surrounding the Temple be cleared for
passage to the devotees.   He submitted that on an average,
about 60,000 devotees visit the Temple every day. There are no
proper queues  for the devotees to maintain discipline and enter
the Temple.   He submits that the basic facilities like toilets for
women   and   men   were   lacking.   As   such,   taking   into
consideration the larger public interest, the Government had
acquired the buildings in the vicinity which were constructed
as   lodges   decades   ago,   by   spending   an   amount   of   Rs.700
crores.   He submitted that the entire area surrounding the
10Temple was acquired through negotiations without resorting to
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act.   He submits that
these   buildings   were   owned   by   Sevayats,   who   are   also   not
opposing the developmental work surrounding the Temple and,
on the contrary, support the same.  
17.Mr. Pai Amit, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
applicants/interveners/impleaders and Mr. Swetaretu Mishra,
learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   Shree   Jagannath
Temple   Managing   Committee   also   support   the   submissions
made by the learned Advocate General. 
18.Mr. A.D.N. Rao, learned Senior Counsel appearing for ASI
submits that the stand of the ASI is reflected in the affidavit
filed before the High Court of Orissa and states that the ASI
has no objection to the construction being carried out strictly in
conformity with the provisions of law.  
19.Though the present appeals challenge the interlocutory
order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court, since
lengthy arguments have been advanced on behalf of both the
11parties, we find it appropriate to consider the submissions on
merits, as advanced. 
20.Before we consider the challenge with regard to violation
of the statutory provisions, it will be apposite to refer to an
earlier decision of this Court, which will have a bearing on the
decision in the present matter. 
21.A   three­Judge   Bench   of   this   Court   in   the   case   of
Mrinalini   Padhi   (supra),   had   an   occasion   to   consider   the
situation prevailing in the vicinity of Shree Jagannath Temple.
This Court in the said case had initially passed an order on 8th
June,   2018,   directing   the   District   Judge,   Puri   to   submit   a
report.   This Court thereafter vide order dated 9th  January,
2019, appointed Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Counsel as
Amicus   Curiae   and   Ms.   Priya   Hingorani,   learned   Senior
Counsel was requested to assist him in the matter.  Shri Ranjit
Kumar, learned Amicus Curiae has submitted interim reports
from time to time on the basis of which certain orders came to
be passed.   Finally, vide the order dated 4th November, 2019,
12this   Court   issued   various   directions.     While   issuing   the
directions, this court had also taken on record the views of
various stakeholders.  
22.This Court in paragraph 17 of the judgment in the case of
Mrinalini Padhi   (supra) had found that redevelopment plan
around the Temple is mainly to decongest the area for the
benefit of pilgrims and to make the city of Puri a world heritage
city.  This Court also recorded that nobody was opposing the
reforms for the betterment of the place.  This Court also noticed
in paragraph 18 that during the annual Rath Yatra, lakhs of
people   visit   the   Temple   town   and   the   congregation   is
unmanageable.  
23.This Court took on record the observations of Shri Ranjit
Kumar, learned Amicus Curiae as well as Ms. Priya Hingorani,
learned Senior Counsel, who had personally visited the Temple
premises.  A perusal of the order would reveal that this Court
had   also   requested   Shri   Tushar   Mehta,   learned   Solicitor
General of India to personally visit the Temple premises.  From
13their observations, it was found that the Temples inside the
Mathas, their Gaadis, Samadhis and other artefacts have been
preserved.  
24.In paragraph 40, this Court issued various directions. In
paragraph 40.15, this Court directed that there was necessity
to   have  a   proper  darshan   by   people   at  large.     It  was   also
directed that it was necessary to avoid commotion and chaos as
large number of pilgrims visit the Temple every day.  This Court
therefore   directed   the   Temple   Administration   and   the   Chief
Administrator   including   the   State   Government   to   prepare   a
roadmap with the help of experts for having proper darshan by
the devotees/pilgrims.  In paragraph 40.16, this Court further
directed the Temple administration and also the Temple police
to ensure that there would be a dedicated section of personnel
to tighten security inside the Temple and ensure that no such
incident takes place in the Temples and no misbehaviour is
meted out to women.  
1425.It   will   also   be   relevant   to   reproduce   the   directions   in
paragraph 40.19 and 40.20, which read thus:
“40.19. The   learned   Amicus   Curiae   has   also
pointed   out   that   there   is   a   necessity   for
separate toilets for male and female. We direct
that   let   the   toilets  be   provided   with  modern
amenities and should be kept absolutely clean.
The number of toilets shall be adequate having
regard   to   the   average   footfall   in   the   temple,
which is large in number.
40.20. There is a necessity pointed out about
the   cloak   rooms.   Let   steps   be   taken   by   the
Temple administration in this regard.”
26.It could thus be seen that the three­Judge Bench of this
Court has emphasized on the necessity to have separate toilets
for male and female. This Court further directed that the toilets
be   provided   with   modern   amenities   and   should   be   kept
absolutely clean.   This Court also directed that the number of
toilets shall be adequate having regard to the average footfall in
the Temple.   This Court further emphasized the necessity to
15have cloak rooms and directed the Temple administration to
take steps in that regard.  
27.This Court further directed the ASI to cooperate and to
permit the activities of improvement which are not prima facie
objectionable and are necessary for public hygiene, sanitation
and public health.  This Court only put a rider that the form of
the new structure is maintained in the same manner as the
ancient one. 
28.It would thus clearly reveal that the nature of construction
which is undertaken by the respondents­State and the Temple
administration is in tune with the directions issued by this
Court. 
29.In   this   background,   we   will   proceed   to   consider   the
submissions with regard to the violation of the provisions of the
said Act.  
30.Clauses (da), (db) and (dc) of Section 2 of the said Act
define   “Authority”,   “competent   authority”   and   “construction”
respectively, which are as under:  
16“2.Definitions .­   In   this   Act,   unless   the
context otherwise requires,­
(a) ………………………………………………….
(da)   “Authority”   means   the   National
Monuments   Authority   constituted   under
Section 20­F;
(db) “competent authority” means an officer
not   below   the   rank   of   Director   of
Archaeology   or   Commissioner   of
Archaeology   of   the   Central   or   State
Government or equivalent rank, specified,
by notification in the Official Gazette, as
the   competent   authority   by   the   Central
Government   to   perform   functions   under
this Act:
Provided   that   the   Central   Government
may,   by   notification   in   the   Official
Gazette,   specify   different   competent
authorities for the purpose of Sections 20­
C, 20­D and 20­E;
(dc) “construction” means any erection of a
structure   or   a   building,   including   any
addition   or   extension   thereto   either
vertically   or   horizontally,   but   does   not
include   any   re­construction,   repair   and
renovation   of   an   existing   structure   or
building,   or,   construction,   maintenance
and   cleansing   of   drains   and   drainage
works and of public latrines, urinals and
similar conveniences, or, the construction
and   maintenance   of   works   meant   for
providing supply of water for public, or,
the   construction   or   maintenance,
extension,   management   for   supply   and
17distribution of electricity to the public or
provision for similar facilities for public;”
31.Section 20A of the said Act reads thus:
“PROHIBITED AND REGULATED AREAS
20A. Declaration of prohibited area and
carrying out public work or other works
in   prohibited   area .—Every   area,
beginning at the limit of the protected
area or the protected monument,  as the
case may be, and extending to a distance
of one hundred metres in all directions
shall be the prohibited area in respect of
such   protected   area   or   protected
monument:
Provided that the Central Government
may,   on   the   recommendation   of   the
Authority, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify an area more than one
hundred   metres   to   be   prohibited   area
having regard to the classification of any
protected monument or protected area,
as the case may be, under Section 4­A.
(2)   Save   as   otherwise   provided   in
Section 20­C, no person, other than an
archaeological officer, shall carry out any
construction in any prohibited area.
(3)   In   a   case   where   the   Central
Government or the Director­General, as
the case may be, is satisfied that—
18(a) it is necessary or expedient for carrying
out   such   public   work   or   any   project
essential to the public; or
(b)   such   other   work   or   project,   in   its
opinion, shall not have any substantial
adverse   impact   on   the   preservation,
safety,   security   of,   or,   access   to,   the
monument   or   its   immediate
surrounding.
It   or   he   may,   notwithstanding
anything contained in sub­section (2), in
exceptional cases and having regard to
the   public   interest,   by   order   and   for
reasons to be recorded in writing, permit,
such public work or project essential to
the public or other constructions, to be
carried out in a prohibited area:
Provided   that   any   area   near   any
protected   monument   or   its   adjoining
area   declared,   during   the   period
beginning  on  or   after   the  16th   day  of
June, 1992 but ending before the date
on which the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological   Sites   and   Remains
(Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010,
receives the assent of the President, as a
prohibited   area   in   respect   of   such
protected monument, shall be deemed to
be   the   prohibited   area   declared   in
respect of that protected monument in
accordance   with   the   provisions   of   this
Act   and   any   permission   or   licence
granted by the Central Government or
the   Director­General,   as   the   case   may
be,   for   the   construction   within   the
19prohibited   area   on   the   basis   of   the
recommendation of the Expert Advisory
Committee,   shall   be   deemed   to   have
been validly granted in accordance with
the   provisions   of   this   Act,   as   if   this
section had been in force at all material
times:
Provided   further   that   nothing
contained in the first proviso shall apply
to any permission granted, subsequent
to the completion of construction or re­
construction of any building or structure
in any prohibited area in pursuance of
the   notification   of   the   Government   of
India   in   the   Department   of   Culture
(Archaeological Survey of India) Number
S.O. 1764, dated the 16th June, 1992
issued   under   Rule   34   of   the   Ancient
Monuments   and   Archaeological   Sites
and   Remains   Rules,  1959,  or,  without
having obtained the recommendations of
the Committee constituted in pursuance
of the order of the Government of India
Number 24/22/2006­M, dated the 20th
July, 2006 (subsequently referred to as
the Expert Advisory Committee in orders
dated the 27th August, 2008 and the 5th
May, 2009).]
(4) No permission, referred to in sub­
section   (3),   including   carrying   out   any
public work or project essential to the
public or other constructions, shall be
granted in any prohibited area on and
after   the   date   on   which   the   Ancient
Monuments   and   Archaeological   Sites
and   Remains   (Amendment   and
20Validation) Bill, 2010 receives the assent
of the President.”
32.Sections 20C and 20D of the said Act read thus:
20C.   Application   for   repair   or
renovation   in   prohibited   area,   or
construction   or   re­construction   or
repair or renovation in regulated area .—
(1) Any person, who owns any building or
structure,   which   existed   in   a   prohibited
area before the 16th day of June, 1992, or,
which had been subsequently constructed
with the approval of the Director­General
and   desires   to   carry   out   any   repair   or
renovation of such building or structure,
may make an application to the competent
authority for carrying out such repair or
renovation, as the case may be.
(2) Any person, who owns or possesses
any building or structure or land in any
regulated  area,  and  desires  to  carry  out
any   construction   or   re­construction   or
repair   or  renovation   of   such   building  or
structure on such land, as the case may
be,   may   make   an   application   to   the
competent   authority   for   carrying   out
construction or re­construction or repair or
renovation, as the case may be.
GRANT OF PERMISSION BY COMPETENT
AUTHORITY
2120D. Grant of permission by competent
authority   within   regulated   area .—(1)
Every application for grant of permission
under  Section  20­C  of   this   Act   shall   be
made to the competent authority in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2)   The   competent   authority   shall,
within   fifteen   days   of   the   receipt   of   the
application,   forward   the   same   to   the
Authority to consider and intimate impact
of such construction (including the impact
of large­scale development project, public
project and project essential to the public)
having   regard   to   the   heritage   bye­laws
relating   to   the   concerned   protected
monument or protected area, as the case
may be:
Provided   that   the   Central  Government
may prescribe the category of applications
in respect of which the permission may be
granted   under   this   sub­section   and   the
application which shall be referred to the
Authority for its recommendations.
(3)   The   Authority   shall,   within   two
months   from   the   date   of   receipt   of
application under sub­section (2), intimate
to the competent authority impact of such
construction (including the impact of large­
scale   development   project,   public   project
and project essential to the public).
(4)   The   competent   authority   shall,
within   one   month   of   the   receipt   of
intimation from the Authority under sub­
section   (3),   either   grant   permission   or
22refuse the same as so recommended by the
Authority.
(5)   The   recommendations   of   the
Authority shall be final.
(6)   In   case   the   competent   authority
refuses   to   grant   permission   under   this
section, it shall, by order in writing, after
giving   an   opportunity   to   the   concerned
person, intimate such refusal within three
months   from   the   date   of   receipt   of   the
application   to   the   applicant,   the   Central
Government and the Authority.
(7)   If   the   competent   authority,   after
grant of the permission under sub­section
(4)   and   during   the   carrying   out   of   the
repair   or   renovation   work   or   re­
construction   of   building   or   construction
referred to in that sub­section, is of the
opinion   (on   the   basis   of   material   in   his
possession or otherwise) that such repair
or   renovation   work   or   re­construction   of
building or construction is likely to have
an   adverse   impact   on   the   preservation,
safety, security or access to the monument
considerably, it may refer the same to the
Authority for its recommendations and if
so recommended, withdraw the permission
granted   under   sub­section   (4)   if   so
required:
Provided   that   the   competent   authority
may,   in   exceptional   cases,   with   the
approval of the Authority grant permission
to the applicant referred to in sub­section
(2) of Section 20­C until the heritage by­
laws   have   been   prepared   under   sub­
23section (1) of Section 20­E and published
under sub­section (7) of that section.
(8)   The   Central   Government,   or   the
Director­General, as the case may be, shall
exhibit,   on   their   website,   all   the
permissions granted or refused under this
Act.”
33.It could thus be seen that the “authority” has been defined
under   Section   2(da)   of   the   said   Act   to   be   a   “National
Monuments Authority” constituted under Section 20F of the
said Act.  
34.As   per   Section   2(db)   of   the   said   Act,   the   “competent
authority” means an officer not below the rank of Director of
archaeology or Commissioner of archaeology of the Central or
State Government or equivalent rank, specified, by notification
in   the   Official   Gazette,   as   the   competent   authority   by   the
Central Government to perform functions under the said Act.  
35.Undisputedly,   the   Director,   Culture,   Department   of
Tourism   and   Culture   (Culture),   Government   of   Orissa,   vide
notification   issued   by   the   Government   of   India   dated   13th
24February 2012, has been notified to be “competent authority”
for the State of Orissa for the purposes of Sections 20C and
20D of the said Act.
36.Clause (dc) of Section 2 of the said Act would be the most
important   one.     The   definition   of   “construction”   specifically
excludes the following:
(i)Re­construction, repair and renovation of an existing
structure or building;
(ii)Construction, maintenance and cleansing of drains and
drainage   works   and   of   public   latrines,   urinals   and
similar conveniences;
(iii)Construction   and   maintenance   of   works   meant   for
providing supply of water for public; and 
(iv)Construction or maintenance, extension, management
for supply and distribution of electricity to the public or
provision for similar facilities for public.
37.No doubt that the learned counsel for the appellant is
right in relying on sub­section (4) of Section 20A of the said Act
25which prohibits any permission including the one for carrying
out any public work or project essential to the public or other
constructions in any prohibited area referred to in sub­section
(3)   thereof   on   and   after   the   date   on   which   the   Ancient
Monuments   and   Archaeological   Sites   and   Remains
(Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010 receives the assent of
the President.  The same was brought into the statute book by
Act No. 10 of 2010.  
38.It is further to be noted that by the very same amendment,
Section 20C of the said Act has also been brought into the
statute book.   Sub­section (1) of Section 20C of the said Act
provides that any person, who owns any building or structure,
which existed in a prohibited area before 16th June, 1992, or,
which had been subsequently constructed with the approval of
the Director­General and desires to carry out any repair or
renovation   of   such   building   or   structure,   may   make   an
application to the competent authority for carrying out such
repair or renovation, as the case may be.  Likewise, sub­section
26(2) of Section 20C of the said Act enables a person, who owns
or possesses any building or structure or land in any regulated
area,   and   desires   to   carry   out   any   construction   or   re­
construction   or   repair   or   renovation   of   such   building   or
structure   on   such   land,   as   the   case   may   be,   to   make   an
application   to   the   competent   authority   for   carrying   out
construction or re­construction or repair or renovation, as the
case may be.
39.Section 20D of the said Act deals with grant of permission
by competent authority within regulated area.  Sub­section (1)
of Section 20D of the said Act provides that an application for
grant of permission under Section 20C of the said Act, shall be
made   to   the   competent   authority.     Sub­section   (2)   thereof
requires the competent authority to forward the same to the
authority to consider and intimate impact of such construction
having regard to the heritage bye­laws relating to the concerned
protected monument or protected area.  Under proviso to sub­
section (2) thereof, the Central Government is empowered to
27prescribe the category of applications in respect of which the
permission   will   be   granted   under   this   sub­section   and   the
applications which shall be referred to the authority for its
recommendations.  Under sub­section (3) thereof, the authority
is required to intimate, within two months from the date of
receipt   of   application   under   sub­section   (2)   thereof,   to   the
competent   authority,   the   impact   of   such   construction   etc.
Under   sub­section   (4)   thereof,   the   competent   authority   is
required to either grant permission or refuse the same as so
recommended by the authority within one month of the receipt
of intimation from the authority under sub­section (3) thereof.
Under   sub­section   (5)   thereof,   a   finality   is   given   to   the
recommendations of the authority.
40.It is a settled principle of law that all the provisions in the
statute have to be read harmoniously.  It is presumed that each
and every provision has been brought by the legislature into the
statute book with some purpose.  A particular provision cannot
be read in isolation and has to be read in context to each other.
28An attempt has to be made to reconcile all the provisions of the
statute together, unless it is impossible.
41.At first blush, the arguments of the appellants on the
basis of sub­section (4) of Section 20A of the said Act may
appear to be attractive.   But when sub­section (4) of Section
20A of the said Act is read in harmony with clause (dc) of
Section 2 and the provisions of Sections 20C and 20D of the
said Act, we find that the submission that no construction at
all can be made in the prohibited area or the regulated area,
would be unsustainable.  
42.Firstly, it is to be noted that clause (dc) of Section 2 of the
said   Act   itself   excludes   four   categories   as   mentioned
hereinabove   from   the   definition   of   “construction”.     The
legislative intent is thus clear that the four categories which are
excluded from the definition of “construction” as defined in
clause (dc) of Section 2 of the said Act would not be treated as a
“construction”, wherever the said term is referred to in the
statute.  The legislative intent is clear that the re­construction,
29repair, renovation of the existing buildings has been excluded
from the definition.   Similarly, the construction, maintenance
etc. of drains, drainage works, public latrines and urinals; the
construction and maintenance of works meant for providing
supply of water to public; and construction etc. for distribution
of electricity, which could be construed to be essential services
for catering to the needs of the public at large, have consciously
been kept out of the definition of “construction”.   It could be
presumed   that   the   legislature   was   aware   that   repairs   and
reconstruction   of   existing   structures   or   buildings   or
construction of essential facilities like public latrines, urinals,
water   supply   and   electricity   distribution   for   the
pilgrims/residents are basic necessities and as such, should be
permitted even in the prohibited area.  If it is not so interpreted,
then Section 20C of the said Act would be rendered otiose and
redundant.  It need not be emphasized that an interpretation
which leads a particular provision to be otiose or redundant or
meaningless, has to be avoided.
3043.It could further be seen that the said position is also
clarified   in   the   affidavit   filed   by   the   Superintending
Archaeologist, ASI before the High Court, which reads thus:
“E.   While   the   works,   such   as   toilets,   drains,
electrical   works,   etc.,   do   not   fall   within   the
definition of ''construction", and therefore can be
carried   out   even   in   the   prohibited   area.   Some
other   works,   such   as   the   reception   center,   fall
squarely with the definition of "construction", and
being in the prohibited area, is not permitted.”
44.Section   20D   of   the   said   Act   deals   with   the   entire
procedure   regarding   grant   of   permission   by   the   competent
authority within regulated area.  Undisputedly, in the present
case, the competent authority has complied with the procedure
as   required   under   Section   20D   of   the   said   Act   and   the
authority,   i.e.,   the   NMA   has   granted   its  permission   for   the
work, which is undertaken.  It will be appropriate to refer to the
relevant part of the order dated 4th September 2021, passed by
the NMA, which reads thus:
“2. After examination of the case, it is stated that
the Authority has "No Objection' under assurance
31of strict compliance of AMASR, Act, 1958. Section
2 (de), to the execution of the following works in
the   prohibited   area   namely   Cloak   Room,   Mini
Cloak Room, Shelter pavilion. Female Toilet, Male
Toilet,   Sevayat   Toilet,   Electrical   Room,   and
Pavement   area,   including   a   place   to   stand   in
queue for toilets and reaching sanctum sanctorum
that are permitted under the exception clause to
the  definition  of  "Construction"  as given  in  the
above mentioned section. In respect of the other
proposed   construction   works   in   the   prohibited­
area­namely Reception Centre, Information cum
Donation Kiosk, First Aid Centre, Police Service
Centre and ATM. Kiosk, it is requested that details
with regard to the facilities for the public which
are   sought   to   he   provided   through   these
structures   to   justify   their   location   in   the
prohibited   area   or   may   be   re­located   in   the   _
Regulated   area.   Further,   it   may   clearly   be
established with relevant details that the scale of
repair/renovation proposed to be carried out in
Bada Chhata Matha and Chhauni Matha does not
tantamount   to   addition/alteration   or
reconstruction.”
45.Insofar   as   the   objections   in   the   report   of   the   ASI   is
concerned, it will be relevant to refer to the note signed by the
Director General of ASI dated 21st February 2022, which reads
thus:
“1. Shree Jagannath Temple, Puri 
32I   visited   the   Shree   Kshetra   Shree
Jagannath   Temple,   a   centrally   protected
monument and the proposed area of work.
The concept plan of the State Government
aims to provide amenities and beautify the
entire environs of the temple. The proposed
amenities fall within the prohibited area of
the   temple.   Since   these   amenities   are
required   for   the   devotees,   it   was   agreed
that this may be allowed. ASI would work
in coordination with the State Government
on the design so that there is no visual
impact   on   the   main   temple.   State
Government was also requested to keep the
entire design  simple in  tandem with the
spiritual   nature   of   the   entire   temple
complex. 
One   point   of   discussion   was   the
proposed Reception centre which is at a
distance of 75 metres from the temple (part
falls   under   the   prohibited   area).   This
bui1ding is proposed to be used to hold
devotees before they proceed to the main
complex.   Given   that   this   would   be   very
essential,   it   was   decided   that   the   State
Government   would   consider   options   to
slightly   move   the   building   beyond   100
metres;   this   would   also   be   good   in   the
interest of security of the temple.”
46.It could thus clearly be seen that the Director­General has
observed that the amenities which fall within the prohibited
area of the temple are required for the devotees, and therefore,
33it was agreed that this may be allowed.  It was further observed
that   the   ASI   would   work   in   coordination   with   the   State
Government on the design so that there is no visual impact on
the main temple.  The State Government was also requested to
keep   the   entire   design   simple   in  tandem   with   the   spiritual
nature of the entire temple complex.
47.In the impugned order, even the Division Bench of the
High Court has recorded the statement of the learned Advocate
General to the effect that both ASI and the State Government
would work together.  Insofar the reception area is concerned,
the impugned order would also reveal that the learned Advocate
General   has   clarified  that  it   will  now   be   moved   out   of  the
prohibited area and it will be constructed in the regulated area.
48.It will further be relevant to refer to the following extract of
the note of the Director­General of ASI, which reads thus:
“The   potential   of   both   Puri   and
Ekamrakshetra to be taken up for World/
Heritage   was   also   discussed.   A   brief
overview of the World Heritage guidelines
especially relating to management of buffer
34zone and the Outstanding Universal value
of both temples was shared with them. It
was agreed that all work in both places
would be designed and executed, keeping
in mind the possibility of becoming World
Heritage   Sites,   going   forward.   The   State
Government was also requested to remove
all   encroachments   from   VaitalDeul   and
Paramaguru   temple   which   is   one   of   the
oldest temple of Kalingan Architecture. The
issue   of   shifting   of   the   kitchen   of
Anantabasudev temple to another. suitable
location was also discussed.”
49.It   could   thus   clearly   be   seen   that   even   the   Director­
General   of   ASI   has   recognized   the   potential   of   Puri   and
Ekamrakshetra for being taken up as World Heritage sites.  It
was   agreed   that   all   the   work   in   both   the   places   would   be
designed   and   executed   keeping   in   mind   the   possibility   of
developing   them   for   being   acknowledged   as   World   Heritage
Sites.
50.The affidavit of the Superintending Archaeologist, ASI to
which   we   have   already   referred   to   hereinabove,   would   also
reveal that there does not appear to be any serious objection
with regard to construction of works such as toilets, drains and
35electrical works in the prohibited area. There also does not
appear to be any serious objection with regard to undertaking
construction in the regulated area.  The insistence is that the
construction has to be carried out after necessary permissions
are obtained from the NMA under the provisions of the said Act.
Another concern appears to be that the entire design or the
facilities should be simple, in tandem with the spiritual nature,
design and aesthetic of the entire temple complex.
51.Taking into consideration all these aspects of the matter,
it is amply clear that the construction activities which are being
undertaken,   are   being   undertaken   in   pursuance   of   the
directions issued by a three­Judge Bench of this Court in the
case of  Mrinalini Padhi   (supra).   The construction is being
carried out for the purpose of providing basic and essential
amenities   like   toilets   for   men   and   women,   cloak   rooms,
electricity rooms etc.   These are the basic facilities which are
necessary for the convenience of the devotees at large.   As
already discussed hereinabove, the legislative intent appears to
36be   clear.     The   legislature   has   deliberately   excluded   four
categories from the definition of “construction”.   The purpose
behind it appears to be that the repairs and renovation of the
buildings, which are existing and the constructions which are
necessary for providing basic facilities like drainage,  toilets,
water supply and distribution of electricity should be kept out
of the rigour of requirement of statutory permissions.
52.An argument was sought to be advanced by Shri Navare
that the said provision is only to enable a person who resides in
the prohibited area to get his existing structure re­constructed,
repaired and renovated and the said provision cannot come to
the aid of the State to create facilities for the public.  Such an
argument is taken note of only to be rejected.  If an individual
person can construct a toilet in a prohibited area; can the State
be denied to do so, when the State finds it necessary to do it in
the larger public interest for providing basic facilities to the
lakhs   of   devotees   visiting   the   shrine?     The   answer   is   an
emphatic ‘no’.
3753.A hue and cry was made that the construction carried out
is contrary to the Inspection Report carried out by the ASI.
However, the note of the Director General of ASI dated 21st
February, 2022 as well as the affidavit filed by the ASI before
the High Court would falsify this position.   
54.It would further be relevant to note that the High Court
itself   has   recorded   the   statement   of   the   learned   Advocate
General for State of Odisha that both the ASI and the State
Government   would   work   together   to   ensure   that   no
archaeological remains are missed out or damaged.  
55.It could thus be seen that even if the appellants had any
genuine   concern,   the   same  is   already   taken   care   of   in   the
impugned order.  
56.In spite of that, the matter was mentioned for obtaining
urgent orders before the Vacation Bench on Monday, i.e., 30th
May, 2022.  Since the matter was not listed on Tuesday, i.e.,
31st  May,   2022,   it   was   again   mentioned   on   the   said   date.
Again, a hue and cry was made as if heavens are going to fall if
38the petitions were not listed.  As such, the petitions were listed
on Thursday, i.e., 2nd June, 2022. We have heard the learned
counsel for the parties at length. 
57.We   have   no   hesitation   in   holding   that   the   activities
undertaken   by   the   State   are   completely   in   tune   with   the
directions issued by the three­Judge Bench of this Court in the
case of  Mrinalini Padhi   (supra).   They are necessary in the
larger public interest and there is no prohibition in the statute
for doing so, as sought to be argued by the appellants.
58.We, therefore, find no merit in the contentions raised on
behalf of the appellants.  We are of the considered view that the
public interest litigation filed before the High Court rather than
being in public interest, is detrimental to the public interest at
large.
59.In the recent past, it is noticed that there is mushroom
growth of public interest litigations.  However, in many of such
petitions,   there   is   no   public   interest   involved   at   all.     The
petitions   are   either   publicity   interest   litigations   or   personal
39interest litigation.  We highly deprecate practice of filing such
frivolous petitions.   They are nothing but abuse of process of
law.  They encroach upon a valuable judicial time which could
be otherwise utilized for considering genuine issues.  It is high
time that such so­called public interest litigations are nipped in
the bud so that the developmental activities in the larger public
interest are not stalled.  
60.In the result, the appeals, having been found to be without
any   substance,   are   dismissed   with   costs,   quantified   at
Rs.1,00,000/­   (Rupees   one   lakh)   each,   payable   by   the
appellants to the respondent No.1 within four weeks from the
date of this judgment.
61.Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of in
the above terms.
   …….........................J.       
    [B.R. GAVAI]  
…….........................J.       
   [HIMA KOHLI]        
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 03, 2022.
40