Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2606 OF 2012
EX. CT. MAHADEV            .… APPELLANT
Versus
THE DIRECTOR GENERAL,
 BOARDER SECURITY FORCE & ORS.  …..  RESPONDENTS
   
J U D G M E N T
HIMA KOHLI, J.
1.The appellant is aggrieved by the judgement dated 3rd March, 2011 passed by
the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi dismissing a writ petition filed by him,
registered as WP(C)No.6709/2008, wherein he had challenged the order dated 19th
March, 2008 passed by the respondent No.4 herein convicting him to life imprisonment
for an offence committed under Section 46 of the Border Security Force Act, 19681 , that
is to say for murder punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602.  By
the impugned order, the Division Bench has upheld the order passed by the respondent
No.2 - Appellate Authority, whereby the statutory appeal filed by the appellant was
1 for short ‘BSF Act’
2 for short ‘IPC’
Page 1 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
dismissed and the order dated 10th March, 2007 passed by the General Security Force
Court was upheld3.
2.The brief facts of the case are that the appellant, who was serving in the BSF,
was tried by the GSFC in the year 2007, for committing an offence under Section 46 of
the BSF Act, that is to say murder punishable under Section 302 of the IPC and the
charges framed against him were as follows :
"The accused No.89131037, Const. Mahadev, of 131 Bn. BSF is charged
with: 
BSF ACT COMMITTING A CIVIL OFFENCE, THAT IS TO SAY  
SEC.46 MURDER, PUNISHABLE U/S 302 IPC  
In that he, 
In a rubber garden located between BP No.2007/S-3 and BP
No.2008/MP in AOR of BOP Bamutia, on 05/06/1004 at about
08:15 hrs. by firing shots from his INSAS Rifle bearing Butt
No.503, Body No.16397/159 caused the death of a civilian
namely  Nandan  Deb  S/o  Sh.  Atinder  Dev  R/o  Village-
Rangotia,   PS-Sidhal,  Distt.-West  Tripura  and  thereby
committed murder."
3.On  the  appellant  pleading  not  guilty  to  the  charge  framed  against  him,  the
prosecution proceeded to examine seventeen witnesses.  The appellant did not produce
any witness.  However, he made an oral statement in his defence.    The plea of private
defence taken by the appellant was rejected and on 10th March, 2007, the GSFC held
him guilty of the charge and sentenced him to suffer imprisonment for life besides
3 for short ‘GSFC’
Page 2 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
dismissing him from service.  Vide order dated 4th April, 2007, the Convening Officer
confirmed the findings and the sentence imposed on the appellant.  Aggrieved by the
said order, the appellant preferred a statutory petition, which was dismissed by the
respondent No.1 – Union of India, vide order dated 19th March, 2008 that has been
upheld by the High Court. 
4.For arriving at the aforesaid conclusion, the High Court has primarily relied on the
testimony of Dr. Ranjit Kumar Das (PW-10), who had conducted the postmortem on the
body of the deceased and deposed that he had died due to firearm injuries and two
bullets had pierced his body.  It was noticed that PW-10 had deposed that having regard
to the nature and place of the injuries, the position of the firer as against that of the
deceased was such that the one who would have fired the shot, must have been on an
elevated position compared to the victim since the direction of the bullets were from
above the chest, going downwards and backward.  Going by the said testimony read
along with the testimony of SI Shanti Bhushan Bhuiya (PW-13), who had deposed that
when he saw the dead body, both the legs were in a folded position, the High Court
arrived at the conclusion that the appellant had made the deceased to crouch down and
thereafter, had fired two shots at him.
Page 3 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
5.Mr. Lalit Kumar, learned counsel for the appellant argued that the High Court has
erred in concurring with the findings of the GSFC and discarding the defence taken by
the appellant that he was compelled to exercise his right of private defence to save his
life when suddenly confronted with intruders who were armed with weapons and had
‘gheraoed’ him.  He alluded to the topography of the Rubber plantation where the
incident  had  taken  place,  which  was  admittedly  uneven  with  depressions  and
undulations, to urge that merely because the deceased was found with his legs in a
folded position, could not be a ground to indict the appellant having regard to the fact
that even as per the version of CT H. Vijay Kumar (PW-1), the eye-witness who was
patrolling in the area along with the appellant, the latter was positioned at a higher level
vis-à-vis the deceased and therefore, it was but natural that on his firing from his rifle,
the bullets would have hit the deceased on the upper part of his body as he was
positioned at a lower level.  It is in this manner that learned counsel for the appellant has
sought to explain the path of the bullets that had pierced the body of the deceased and
indicated that the shots were fired by the appellant taking a downward angle and not
face on face.  
6.Learned counsel for the appellant also referred to the testimony of Sapan Das
(PW-2) and other prosecution witnesses to submit that villagers in the area being close
to the border of Bangladesh, used to regularly indulge in smuggling activities and even
Page 4 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
the deceased used to do so.  He pointed out that this fact had not only been deposed by
PW-1,  but  also  by  SI  (M)  Suresh  Kumar  Dagar  (PW-17),  who  during  his  cross-
examination, had stated in so many words that since the deployment of 131 Battalion,
BSF and prior to the incident in question, trans-border criminals had attacked BSF
personnel seven times and most of the times, they had to use force by opening fire in
self-defence and the defence of property.  In fact, the deceased had been apprehended
for indulging in smuggling activities and his name features in the list of smugglers
maintained  by the  BSF.   He  also  adverted  to  the  fact  that  currency  worth  24,700
Bangladeshi Takas was recovered from the shirt pocket of the deceased along with a
‘Dah’ that was found lying at the spot next his body.  The point sought to be made was
that in the above backdrop, the High Court ought not to have discarded the testimony of
PW-1 and PW-17 to arrive at a conclusion that this was a case of cold-blooded murder
committed by the appellant whereas he had acted in the heat of the moment, purely in
his self defence.
7.Per contra, Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing
for the respondents – Union of India, has stoutly defended the findings returned by the
GSFC and upheld the High Court.  She submitted that the High Court cannot be faulted
for disbelieving the testimony of PW-1, an eye-witness to the incident who was on duty
at the Rubber plantation along with the appellant on the fateful day.  It is her contention
Page 5 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
that the findings of the GSFC are sound and reliance has rightly been placed on the
testimonies of the local villagers, namely, Sapan Das (PW-2), another witness by the
name of Sapan Das (PW-3), Tapan Das (PW-4) and Sunil Das (PW-5), who had stated
that the appellant had summoned the deceased and then shot at him twice without any
provocation.   She submitted that the testimony of the doctor (PW-10) was a clincher
and left no manner of doubt that the appellant had made the deceased to kneel down
and thereafter fired two shots directly at him, causing his death.  
8.We have carefully considered the arguments advanced by learned counsel for
the parties and perused the records, particularly, the testimony of the material witnesses
and the statement of defence made by the appellant.  
9.The singular question that requires to be examined in the present appeal is
whether the appellant was entitled to exercise the right of private defence in the given
facts and circumstances of the case.
10.We may commence the discussion by first observing that the instinct of self-
preservation is embedded in the DNA of every person.  The doctrine of the right to
private defence is founded on the very same instinct of self-preservation that has been
duly enshrined in the criminal law. The provisions that deal with the right of private
defence have been enumerated in Sections 96 to 106 of the IPC and fall under Chapter
Page 6 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
IV that deals with General Exceptions. Section 96 IPC states that nothing is an offence
which is done in the exercise of the right of private defence.  Whether a person has
legitimately acted in exercise of the right of defence given a particular set of facts and
circumstances,  would  depend  on  the  nuance  of  each  case.  For  arriving  at  any
conclusion, the Court would be required to examine all the surrounding circumstances.
If the Court finds that the circumstances did warrant a person to exercise the right of
private defence, then such a plea can be considered.  Section 97 IPC states that every
person has a right of defence of person as well as of property.    Section 99 IPC refers to
the acts against which there is no right of private defence and the extent to which the
said right can be exercised.  On a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is apparent that
the rights vested under Sections 96 to 98 and 100 to 106 IPC are broadly governed by
Section 99 IPC.
11.Section 100 IPC throws light on the circumstances in which the right of private
defence of body can be stretched to the extent of voluntarily causing death.  To claim
such a right, the accused must be able to demonstrate that the circumstances were
such that there existed a reasonable ground to apprehend that he would suffer grievous
hurt that would even cause death. The necessity of averting an impending danger is the
core criteria for exercising such a right.  Both Sections 100 and 101 IPC define the
circumstances in which the right of private defence of the body extends to causing
Page 7 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
death or causing any harm other than death.  Provisions of Sections 102 and 105 IPC
stipulate the stage of commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of
the body and property respectively and state that the said right commences as soon as
a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises from an attempt or threat to
commit the offence, though such an offence may not have been committed.  The
provisions state that it continues as long as such an apprehension or danger to the
body continues.
12.In Rizan and Another v. State of Chhattisgarh through the Chief Secretary,
Government of Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh  4 , this Court has observed that
the accused need not prove the existence of private self-defence beyond reasonable
doubt and that it would suffice if he could show that the preponderance of probabilities
is in favour of his plea, just as in a civil case. 
13.In State of M.P . v. Ramesh  5, it was observed that :
4 (2003) 2 SCC 661
5 (2005) 9 SCC 705
Page 8 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
“11.  …………A plea of right of private defence cannot be based on sur -
mises and speculation. While considering whether the right of private de -
fence is available to an accused, it is not relevant whether he may have a
chance to inflict severe and mortal injury on the aggressor. In order to find
whether the right of private defence is available to an accused, the entire
incident must be examined with care and viewed in its proper setting……..
To claim a right of private defence extending to voluntary causing of death,
the accused must show that there were circumstances giving rise to rea -
sonable grounds for apprehending that either death or grievous hurt would
be caused to him. The burden is on the accused to show that he had a
right of private defence which extended to causing of death. Sections 100
and 101 IPC define the limit and extent of right of private defence.”
14.Section 105 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 states that the burden of proof
rests with the accused who takes up the plea of self defence.  In the absence of proof,
the Court will not be in a position to assume that there is any truth in the plea of self de -
fence.  Thus, it would be for the accused to adduce positive evidence or extract neces -
sary information from the witnesses produced by the prosecution and place any other
material on record to establish his plea of private defence.  In James Martin v. State of
Kerala  6, it has been observed by this Court as under :
“13.  ………An accused taking the plea of the right of private defence is
not necessarily required to call evidence; he can establish his plea by
reference  to  circumstances  transpiring  from  the  prosecution  evidence
itself. The question in such a case would be a question of assessing the
true effect of the prosecution evidence, and not a question of the accused
discharging any burden. Where the right of private defence is pleaded, the
defence must be a reasonable and probable version satisfying the court
that the harm caused by the accused was necessary for either warding off
the attack or for forestalling the further reasonable apprehension from the
side of the accused. The burden of establishing the plea of self-defence is
6 (2004) 2 SCC 203
Page 9 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
on  the  accused  and  the  burden  stands  discharged  by  showing
preponderance of probabilities in favour of that plea on the basis of the
material  on  record.  (See  Munshi  Ram  v. Delhi  Admn.7 , State  of
Gujarat v. Bai  Fatima8 , State  of  U.P .  v. Mohd.  Musheer  Khan9 
and Mohinder Pal Jolly  v. State of Punjab10…. …. The accused need not
prove the existence of the right of private defence beyond reasonable
doubt.  It  is  enough  for  him  to  show  as  in  a  civil  case  that  the
preponderance of probabilities is in favour of his plea.”   
15.In the captioned decision, reliance has been placed on the observations
made by this Court in Salim Zia     v.     State of Uttar Pradesh  .  11, wherein it has been
held as under :
“9. …….It is true that the burden on an accused person to establish the
plea  of self-defence  is  not as  onerous  as  the  one  which  lies  on  the
prosecution and that while the prosecution is required to prove its case
beyond reasonable doubt, the accused need not establish the plea to the
hilt and may discharge his onus by establishing a mere preponderance of
probabilities either by laying basis for that plea in the cross-examination of
prosecution witnesses or by adducing defence evidence.”
16.In Dharam and Others v. State of Haryana  12, this Court had the occasion to
examine the scope of the right of private defence and had made the following pertinent
observations:
“18.   Thus, the basic principle underlying the doctrine of the right of private
defence is that when an individual or his property is faced with a danger
and immediate aid from the State machinery is not readily available, that
7 AIR 1968 SC 702
8 (1975) 2 SCC 7
9 (1977) 3 SCC 562]
10 (1979) 3 SCC 30 
11 (1979) 2 SCC 648
12 (2007) 15 SCC 241
Page 10 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
individual is entitled to protect himself and his property. That being so, the
necessary corollary is that the violence which the citizen defending himself
or his property is entitled to use must not be unduly disproportionate to the
injury which is sought to be averted or which is reasonably apprehended
and should not exceed its legitimate purpose. We may, however, hasten to
add that the means and the force a threatened person adopts at the spur
of the moment to ward off the danger and to save himself or his property
cannot be weighed in golden scales. It is neither possible nor prudent to
lay down abstract parameters which can be applied to determine as to
whether  the  means  and  force  adopted by the  threatened person was
proper or not. Answer to such a question depends upon a host of factors
like the prevailing circumstances at the spot, his feelings at the relevant
time, the confusion and the excitement depending on the nature of assault
on him, etc. Nonetheless, the exercise of the right of private defence can
never be vindictive or malicious. It would be repugnant to the very concept
of private defence.”
17.In Buta Singh v. State of Punjab  13, this Court  had emphasised that a person
who is apprehending death or bodily injury, cannot weigh in golden scales on the spur
of the moment and in the heat of circumstances, the number of injuries required to
disarm the assailants who were armed with weapons.  Referring to the said decision,
this Court had made the following observations in James Martin  (supra) : 
“17. …… In moments of excitement and disturbed mental equilibrium it is
often difficult to expect the parties to preserve composure and use exactly
only so much force in retaliation commensurate with the danger appre -
hended to him. Where assault is imminent by use of force, it would be law -
ful to repel the force in self-defence and the right of private defence com -
mences, as soon as the threat becomes so imminent. Such situations
have to be pragmatically viewed and not with high-powered spectacles or
microscopes to detect slight or even marginal overstepping. Due weigh -
tage has to be given to, and hyper technical approach has to be avoided in
considering what happens on the spur of the moment on the spot and
keeping in view normal human reaction and conduct, where self-preserva -
13 (1991) 2 SCC 612
Page 11 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
tion is the paramount consideration. But, if the fact situation shows that in
the guise of self-preservation, what really has been done is to assault the
original aggressor, even after the cause of reasonable apprehension has
disappeared, the plea of right of private defence can legitimately be nega -
tived. The court dealing with the plea has to weigh the material to conclude
whether the plea is acceptable. It is essentially, as noted above, a finding
of fact.
xxxx
20. The right of private defence is essentially a defensive right circum -
scribed by the governing statute i.e. IPC, available only when the circum -
stances clearly justify it. It should not be allowed to be pleaded or availed
as a pretext for a vindictive, aggressive or retributive purpose of offence. It
is a right of defence, not of retribution, expected to repel unlawful aggres -
sion and not as a retaliatory measure. While providing for exercise of the
right, care has been taken in IPC not to provide and has not devised a
mechanism whereby an attack may be a pretence for killing. A right to de -
fend does not include a right to launch an offensive, particularly when the
need to defend no longer survived.”
18.The situation in which the plea of a right to private defence would be available to
the accused was discussed by this Court in Bhanwar Singh and Others v. State of
Madhya Pradesh  14 and it was held thus :
“50.  The plea of private defence has been brought up by the appellants.
For this plea to succeed in totality, it must be proved that there existed a
right to private defence in favour of the accused, and that this right ex -
tended to causing death. Hence, if the court were to reject this plea, there
are two possible ways in which this may be done. On one hand, it may be
held that there existed a right to private defence of the body. However,
more harm than necessary was caused or, alternatively, this right did not
extend to causing death. Such a ruling may result in the application of
Section 300 Exception 2, which states that culpable homicide is not mur -
der if the offender, in the exercise in good faith of the right of private de -
fence of person or property, exceeds the power given to him by law and
14 (2008) 16 SCC 657
Page 12 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
causes the death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of
defence without premeditation, and without any intention of doing more
harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence. The other situa -
tion is where, on appreciation of facts, the right of private defence is held
not to exist at all.
xxx
60. To put it pithily, the right of private defence is a defence right. It is nei -
ther a right of aggression or of reprisal. There is no right of private defence
where there is no apprehension of danger. The right of private defence is
available only to one who is suddenly confronted with the necessity of
averting  an  impending  danger  not  of  self-creation. Necessity  must  be
present, real or apparent.”
19.The principles underlying the doctrine of right to private defence have been
neatly summed up in the captioned case in the following words :-
“61. The basic principle underlying the doctrine of the right of private de -
fence is that when an individual or his property is faced with a danger and
immediate aid from the State machinery is not readily available, that indi -
vidual is entitled to protect himself and his property. That being so, the
necessary corollary is that the violence which the citizen defending himself
or his property is entitled to use must not be unduly disproportionate to the
injury which is sought to be averted or which is reasonably apprehended
and should not exceed its legitimate purpose. We may, however, hasten to
add that the means and the force a threatened person adopts on the spur
of the moment to ward off the danger and to save himself or his property
cannot be weighed in golden scales. It is neither possible nor prudent to
lay down abstract parameters which can be applied to determine as to
whether  the  means  and  force  adopted by the  threatened person was
proper or not. Answer to such a question depends upon a host of factors
like the prevailing circumstances at the spot, his feelings at the relevant
time; the confusion and the excitement depending on the nature of assault
on him, etc. Nonetheless, the exercise of the right of private defence can
never be vindictive or malicious. It would be repugnant to the very concept
of private defence. (See  Dharam v. State of Haryana15)”
15 (2007) 15 SCC 241
Page 13 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
20.In Raj Singh v. State of Haryana and Others  16, supplementing the view
of Justice R. Banumathi, who had authored the decision on behalf of a three
Judges Bench, Justice T.S. Thakur had the following to state on the application
of the provisions of Exception 2 to Section 300 IPC where an accused sets up
the right to private defence :
“32. A conjoint  reading  of  the  provisions  of  Sections  96  to  103  and
Exception 2 to Section 300 IPC leaves no manner of doubt that culpable
homicide is not murder if the offender, in the exercise in good faith of the
right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to
him by  law  and causes  the  death of the  person against whom  he  is
exercising such right of defence, provided that such right is exercised
without premeditation and without any intention of doing more harm than is
necessary for the purpose of such defence.  A fortiori in cases where an
accused  sets  up  right  of  private  defence,  the  first  and  the  foremost
question that would fall for determination by the court would be whether
the accused had the right of private defence in the situation in which death
or other harm was caused by him. If the answer to that question is in the
negative, Exception 2 to Section 300 IPC would be of no assistance.
Exception 2 presupposes that the offender had the right of private defence
of person or property but he had exceeded such right by causing death. It
is only in case answer to the first question is in the affirmative viz. that the
offender had the right of defence of person or property, that the next
question viz. whether he had exercised that right in good faith and without
premeditation and without any intention of doing more harm than was
necessary for the purpose of such defence would arise. Should answer to
any one of these questions be in the negative, the offender will not be
entitled to the benefit of Exception 2 to Section 300 IPC.
33.  Absence of good faith in the exercise of the right of private defence,
premeditation  for  the  exercise  of  such  right  and  acts  done  with  the
intention of causing more harm than is necessary for the purpose of such
defence would deny to the offender the benefit of Exception 2 to Section
300 IPC. The legal position on the subject is fairly well settled by a long
line of decisions of this Court to which copious reference has been made
16 (2015) 6 SCC 268
Page 14 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
by  Banumathi,  J.  No  useful  purpose  would,  therefore,  be  served  by
referring to them over again. All that need be said is that whether or not a
right of private defence of person or property was available to the offender
is the very first question that must be addressed in a case of the present
kind  while  determining  the  nature  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
accused, whether or not a right of private defence was available to an
offender is, in turn, a question of fact or at least a mixed question of law
and fact to be determined in the facts and circumstances of each individual
case that may come up before the court.”
21.To sum up, the right of private defence is necessarily a defensive right which is
available only when the circumstances so justify it.  The circumstances are those that
have been elaborated in the IPC.   Such a right would be available to the accused when
he or his property is faced with a danger and there is little scope of the State machinery
coming to his aid.  At the same time, the courts must keep in mind that the extent of the
violence  used  by  the  accused  for  defending  himself  or  his  property  should  be  in
proportion to the injury apprehended.  This is not to say that a step to step analysis of
the injury that was apprehended and the violence used is required to be undertaken by
the Court; nor is it feasible to prescribe specific parameters for determining whether the
steps taken by the accused to invoke private self-defence and the extent of force used
by  him  was  proper  or  not.  The  Court’s  assessment  would  be  guided  by  several
circumstances including the position on the spot at the relevant point in time, the nature
of apprehension in the mind of the accused, the kind of situation that the accused was
seeking to ward off, the confusion created by the situation that had suddenly cropped up
Page 15 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
resulting the in knee jerk reaction of the accused, the nature of the overt acts of the party
who had threatened the accused resulting in his resorting to immediate defensive action,
etc.  The underlying factor should be that such an act of private defence should have
been done in good faith and without malice.      
22.Being mindful of the afore-stated parameters, we may examine the plea of self-
defence raised by the appellant in the attending facts and circumstances of the case.
The factum of rampant smuggling in the area has not been disputed by either side.  The
records reveal that border fencing in the area in question had been erected just a few
months before the incident had taken place.  Prior to that, many villagers used to freely
indulge in smuggling activities by crossing over to the Bangladesh side and vice versa.
A couple of months after the fencing had been fixed along the International border with
Bangladesh, there was an incident where smugglers had assaulted one of the members
of the Battalion when he was trying to prevent them from crossing the border.  That the
deceased used to indulge in smuggling activities and his name was mentioned in the list
of smugglers maintained by the BSF, is also a matter of record.
23.Viewed in the above setting, we may proceed to examine the statement by way
of defence made by the appellant which has been extracted at some length in the
impugned judgment.  He has stated at the relevant time, that he was posted at BOP
Page 16 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
Bamutia, Tripura, which is adjoining to the border of Bangladesh.  While on patrolling
duty in the early hours of 5th June, 2004, he admitted to have fired from his rifle at one
Nandan Deb, who died as a result of the firearm injuries.   The version of the appellant
was that when he was patrolling along with CT H. Vijay Kumar (PW-1), in the Rubber
plantation, an area  with depressions and undulations on the ground surface, he had
noticed 6-7 persons crossing over from Bangladesh by cutting across the International
border.  They had tried to ‘gherao’ him and PW-1.  They were armed with weapons like
‘'Bhala', 'Dah' and ‘Lathi’.  Seeing himself cornered, the appellant started to retreat.  But
the intruders kept closing him and were in or at a distance of ten yards.  Faced with such
a precarious situation where the appellant gathered an impression that the intruders
were going to attack him any minute, fearing for his life, the appellant fired two rounds in
the air.  This did not deter the intruders who kept on inching closer to the appellant.
When one of the intruders, namely, Nandan Deb came as close as 3-4 yards from him
and tried to attack him by raising his ‘Dah’, apprehending an imminent and perceptible
threat to his life, the appellant fired at him due to which he fell on the ground.  While, the
other miscreants fled away to Bangladesh, Nandan Deb collapsed at the spot and was
declared dead.  
24.Having  scanned  the  testimony  of  the  prosecution  witnesses,  we  are  of  the
opinion that the testimony of CT H Vijay Kumar (PW-1) cannot be completely discarded,
Page 17 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
as done by the GSFC.  He has deposed that when he and the appellant were patrolling
in the area on the relevant date, they had seen three persons crossing the international
border from Bangladesh side at 8.00 AM.  On noticing the intruders, they had challenged
them to stop at a distance of 50 meters.  But the intruders ran away in the direction of
Bangladesh.  At this, PW-1 and the appellant had turned back and while continuing with
their  patrolling  duty,  they  saw  6-7  persons  rushing  towards  them  from  the  side  of
Bangladesh,  carrying  weapons  like  ‘Dah’,  ‘Bhala’ and  ‘Lathi’ in  their  hands.   They
managed  to  surround  the  appellant,  who  was  closer  to  them.   Apprehending  an
imminent and real threat to his life, the appellant had fired from his rifle at the intruders in
self defence and the deceased who was a part of the group, sustained bullet injuries and
had fallen on the ground.  The trajectory of the bullets indicates that the firing took place
from a higher position vis-à-vis the deceased.  But that does not necessarily mean that
the appellant had summoned the deceased and made him crouch on the ground before
shooting at him, as assumed by the High Court.  The uneven terrain of the Rubber
plantation  with  slopes  and  undulating  surface  would  offer  a  plausible  alternate
explanation for the trajectory of the bullets fired by the appellant at the deceased.  If the
former was positioned at an elevated spot, then it was inevitable that the bullets would
have hit the chest of the deceased who was down below the slope, and made a path
Page 18 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
downwards in the body.  Thus the preponderance of probabilities would swing in favour
of the plea of self defence taken by the appellant. 
25.On a broad conspectus of the events as they had unfolded, we are of the opinion
that the right of private self defence would be available to the appellant keeping in mind
preponderance of probabilities that leans in favour of the appellant. In a fact situation
where he was suddenly confronted by a group of intruders, who had come menacingly
close to him, were armed with weapons and ready to launch an assault on him, he was
left with no other option but to save his life by firing at them from his rifle and in the
process two of the shots had pierced through the deceased,  causing his death.  We are
therefore of the opinion that the appellant ought not to have been convicted for having
committed the murder of the deceased.  Rather, the offence made out is of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder under Exception 2 to Section 300 IPC, thereby
attracting the provisions of Section 304 IPC.   
26.In  view  of  the  aforesaid  discussion,  the  appeal  is  partly  allowed  and  the
impugned judgment is modified to the extent that the appellant is held guilty for the
offence  of  culpable  homicide,  not  amounting  to  murder  as  contemplated  under
Exception 2 to Section 300 IPC.   Records reveal that by the time the appellant was
granted bail by this Court on 4th July, 2016, he had already suffered incarceration for a
Page 19 of 20Civil Appeal No.2606 of 2012
period of over eleven years, which given the peculiar facts and circumstances of the
present case, is considered sufficient punishment for the offence.  The appellant is
accordingly  set  free  for  the  period  already  undergone  and  the  bail  bonds  stand
discharged.
27.The appeal is disposed of on the above terms. 
................................. J.
   [B.R. GAVAI]
    ................................... J.
    [HIMA KOHLI]
NEW DELHI,
JUNE  14 ,  2022
Page 20 of 20