REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.   903    OF 2022
(Arising out of SLP (CRL.) No. 6548 of 2019)
MS.  P1xxx               …….  APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTARAKHAND & ANR.            …….  RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari, J .
Leave granted.
2. This appeal is directed against the order dated 25.09.2018 as
passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Criminal Revision
Petition No. 42 of 2018 whereby, the High Court declined to interfere with
the order dated 28.10.2017, as passed by the Sessions Judge, Chamoli
in Sessions Trial No. 8 of 2017, discharging the accused-respondent No.
2 of the offence under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602 on
the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction with liberty to the prosecution to
proceed against the accused in the appropriate Court while also directing
1  Looking to the subject matter of this appeal, which involves the accusations pertaining to
the offence of rape punishable under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, we have
masked the identity of the appellant and substituted her name by the expression “Ms. P” in
the title as also in the body of this judgment, wherever occurring.  
The office shall take care while issuing the relevant copies to not disclose the
identity of the appellant.
2 ‘IPC’, for short.
1transfer of the case in relation to the other offences under Sections 504
and 506 IPC to the Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class, Gairsain,
District Chamoli.
3. The relevant background aspects and factual matrix of the case
are not of much complications, but the operation of law, with regard to
territorial jurisdiction for the offence pertaining to Section 376 IPC and
segregation of charges, calls for examination in this appeal with reference
to the question as to whether the said offence under Section 376 IPC and
the other offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC fall within the ambit of
‘one  series  of  acts  so  connected  together  as  to  form  the  same
transaction ’ for the purpose of trial together in terms of Section 220 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973?3
4. The question above-mentioned carries the peculiarities of its own
in  the  present  case;  and  the  peculiarities  have  got  confounded  with
cursory disposal of revision petition by the High Court with an erroneous
assumption  as  if  it  were  a  case  of  challenge  to  the  acquittal  of  the
accused-respondent No. 2. We are rather impelled to observe at the
outset and with respect that, the impugned order of the High Court is a
cryptic one, where neither the facts nor the relevant questions of law have
gone into appropriate consideration; and the case of ‘discharge’ because
of territorial jurisdiction has been treated by the High Court as that of
‘acquittal’.  This  aspect  of  the  matter  has  indeed  formed  a  point  of
contention before us.  In the ordinary course, we would have set aside the
3 ‘CrPC’, for short.
2order impugned and remanded the matter for reconsideration by the High
Court but, looking to the subject-matter and the status of parties involved
in this protracted litigation since the year 2016 as also looking to the fact
that, after trial, the accused-respondent No. 2 has been acquitted of the
said offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC, we have considered it
proper to deal with the relevant question on its merits in this appeal itself. 
5.In the aforesaid backdrop, the relevant factual aspects could be
summarised as follows:
5.1.The present case has its genesis in the proposed matrimonial
alliance by way of engagement of the appellant and respondent No. 2,
both being the residents of Village Dangidhar (Saliyana), Tehsil Gairsain,
District  Chamoli,  Uttarakhand.  Admittedly,  they  were  engaged  on
13.11.2015 at their village.
5.2. Put in a nutshell, the allegations of the appellant had been that
after their engagement, she was invited by the respondent No. 2 to Delhi;
and was subjected to sexual intercourse by respondent No. 2 against her
wishes at Delhi in the month of February 2016. The appellant further
alleged that the respondent No. 2, thereafter, made a demand of money
and refused to marry her when the demand was not met; and later on, he
hurled abuses on her and also threatened to kill. These aspects and other
facts/allegations were specified in a complaint filed by the appellant under
Section 156(3) CrPC before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Gairsain,
District Chamoli while complaining of inaction of police on the complaint
3made by her mother. The learned Judicial Magistrate, after having gone
through the complaint, formed an opinion in his order dated 21.01.2017
that the matter required investigation and, accordingly, directed the police
station concerned to register the First Information Report4 and keep the
Court apprised of the investigation.  
5.3.The  contents  of  the  complaint  so  made  by  the  appellant,
reproduced and reiterated by the learned Judicial Magistrate in his order
dated 21.01.2017, which would specify the nature of accusations and the
place/places of occurrence/occurrences, could be usefully extracted as
under: -
“The complaint alongwith affidavit and other documents, is filed by
the complainant in this court seeking an order for registering a
F.I.R. against accused Narender Sah. As per the complaint, the
complainant is a resident of Tehsil Gairsain. The complainant –
Ms. P d/o Sh. Rajeev Rawat r/o Dangidhar Tehsil Gairsain, Distt.
Chamoli was engaged to Narender Sah s/o Sh. Dhan Singh Sah
r/o village Dhargair Tehsil Gairsain, Distt Chamoli on 13.11.2015
as  per  Hindu  Rights  and  Ceremonies  at  village  Dhangidhar
(Saliyana). It is thereafter stated that on 21.12.2016, the accused
asked  the  complainant  to  come  to  Delhi  for  the  purchase  of
clothes for marriage and threatened her that he would break the
engagement in case she would not come. The complainant visited
Delhi alongwith her  cousin Tikka  Singh.  The  accused met the
complainant at Kashmiri gate. The complainant’s cousin went to
his relatives place from Kashmiri gate itself while the complainant
went with the accused to his house at Khanpur. Thereafter from
21.02.2016 upto 24.02.2016, it is stated that the accused had
sexual intercourse with the complainant against her wishes. It was
stated by the accused that since they are engaged, they are now
living as husband and wife. It is stated that the accused threatened
the complainant that is she does not do things according to his
wishes, he may change the matrimonial alliance. In the series of
events the accused also told the complainant to bring Rs. 25lakh
from  her  mother  since  the  accused  requires  the  same  for
construction of a house in New Delhi and that he will marry the
complainant  only  if  she  gives  him  the  money.  Thereafter  the
complainant’s mother, while referring to the aforesaid discussions
4 “FIR’, for short.
4filed a complaint at P.S. Gairsain. It is stated that the accused
came to the Police station and filed an affidavit on 01.11.2016
assuring that he will marry his fiancé Ms. P in December 2016. In
the said affidavit, it has been accepted by the accused Narender
Sah that he and Ms. P were engaged on 13.11.2015 and that on
account of being busy due to his occupation, the accused would
marry the complainant in December 2016. But thereafter he did
not marry her and instead threatened her to kill her while hurling
abuses  at  her.  Thereafter  the  mother of  the  complainant  Smt.
Shakuntala Devi  filed a complaint  against  the  accused in  P.S.
Gairsain, Distt. Chamoli on 12.12.2016. Since no steps were taken
against the accused by the P.S. Gairsain, Smt. Shakuntala Devi
filed a complaint to the superintendent of police, Distt. Chamoli in
a complaint letter dated 16.12.2016. It is stated that no steps were
taken by the police against Narender Sah. Both the parties were
also referred for counselling to women cell Gopeshwar but the
counselling has failed. As per the complainant the accused is not
ready to marry the complainant Ms. P and is still demanding Rs.
25 lakh whereas the accused, on the pretext of marriage has not
only done engagement with Ms. P but also had sexual intercourse
with her against her wishes, and yet is not marrying her.” 
5.4. In view of the directions aforesaid, FIR No. 3 of 2017 came to be
registered at Police Station, Gairsain and after investigation, a charge-
sheet  was  submitted  in  the  Court  of  Judicial  Magistrate  First  Class,
Gairsain, District Chamoli for offences under Sections 376, 504 and 506
IPC; and in view of the involvement of offence under Section 376 IPC, the
case was committed to the Court of Sessions Judge, Chamoli. The order
passed  by  the  learned  Sessions  Judge,  Chamoli  on  the  question  of
framing charge has given rise to the present dispute. 
6.The Sessions Judge, Chamoli, took up the matter in Sessions
Trial No. 8 of 2017 and arguments were heard for framing of charge,
where it was, inter alia, contended on behalf of the accused-respondent
No. 2 that the entire incident pertaining to the offence under Section 376
IPC, as per the allegation in the FIR as also in the statement of victim,
5took place at Delhi which was beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the
Court at Chamoli and, therefore, the Court was not competent to try the
said offence. 
6.1.In the impugned order dated 28.10.2017, the learned Sessions
Judge agreed with the contentions so urged on behalf of the accused and
held that the offence under Section 376 IPC, which had taken place at
Delhi, was not a continuing one; and whatever threat was allegedly given
by the accused to the victim, it did not constitute a kind of offence which
could be said to be in the series of same transaction. Therefore, the
learned Sessions Judge concluded that the accused was entitled to be
discharged in relation to the offence under Section 376 IPC for want of
territorial jurisdiction and, in sequel, also found it just and proper to remit
the matter to the Court of Judicial Magistrate for trial of the remaining
offences pertaining to Sections 504 and 506 IPC.  The relevant part of the
impugned order dated 28.10.2017 reads as under: - 
“6.In  the  light  of  rival  arguments  of  the  parties,  I  have  gone
through the entire material collected during the investigation. From
the material collecting during the investigation it is clear that the
engagement between the victim and accused person had taken
place within the jurisdiction of District Chamoli but the incident of
physical relationship or sexual intercourse between the victim and
the accused person as alleged in the F.I.R and in the statements
of victim recorded under Section 161 and 164 of the Cr.P.C. is
found  to  be  at  Delhi.  It  is  specifically  alleged  in  the  First
Information Report that whatever physical relation was established
between  the  victim  and  accused  person  was  in  the  tenanted
premises  of  accused  at  Khanpur,  Delhi.  The  victim  has  also
reiterated this fact in her statement recorded under Section 164 of
the Cr.P.C that in the month of February, 2016 accused has called
the victim at Delhi to introduce her to his Buwa and accused had
come to receive her at Kashmirigate Bus Station at Delhi from
where he took her to his rented premises and kept her there from
621.02.2016 to 24.02.2016. During this period the accused tried to
commit rape upon her and when she resisted, he threatened to
change  the  decision  of  marriage  and  then  he  made  physical
relation with the victim against her will. In her statement recorded
under Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. the victim has also stated that on
23rd March, 2016 she again went to Delhi on the call of accused
and at that time the accused made physical relationship twice with
her  consent  which  was  given  on  the  pretext  of  marriage.
Therefore, from the evidence collected during the investigation it is
clear that the place of occurrence of the alleged offence under
Section 376 of the I.P.C is at Delhi. The offence of rape is not a
continuing offence and whatever threat is alleged to have been
given by the accused to the victim is on phone and is not a kind of
offence  which  can  be  said  to  be  in  the  series  of  transaction.
Therefore, this Court does not possess territorial jurisdiction to try
the offence against the accused under Section 376 of the I.P.C.
Thus, the accused is liable to be discharged on this account. The
rest allegations, which relate to Section 504 and 506 of the I.P.C.,
are not exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions for which the
case of the accused can be transferred to the competent Court
under Section 208 of the Cr.P.C for proceeding according to law.
                                             
ORDER
Accused Narendra Shah is discharged under Section 376 of the
I.P.C on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction with the liberty
to proceed prosecution against the accused in the appropriate
Court.
The case is transferred to the Court of Judicial Magistrate, First
Class, Gairsain, District- Chamoli under Section 208 of the Cr.P.C.
as the remaining offences are not exclusively triable by the Court
of Sessions for proceeding according to law.
Accused is directed to appear before the Judicial Magistrate, First
Class, Gairsain, District- Chamoli on 22.11.2017 for argument on
charge.”
(emphasis supplied)
7.The order aforesaid was challenged by the appellant in the said
Criminal  Revision  Petition  No.  42  of  2018  before  the  High  Court.
Unfortunately, the High Court, in its impugned order dated 25.09.2018,
chose to decide the matter in the absence of revisionist (i.e., the present
appellant) and, without even taking into consideration the nature of order
passed by the Sessions Judge, simply observed, rather rhetorically, that
7in case of acquittal, even if two views were possible, the Appellate Court
would not reverse the finding of acquittal unless the finding was perverse;
and that there was no perversity, illegality and jurisdictional error in the
order impugned.  Accordingly, the revision petition was dismissed.  The
entire of the order passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court
reads as under: -
“This revision has not been admitted yet.
This criminal revision has been directed against the judgment
and  order  dated  28.10.2017,  passed  by  the  learned  Sessions
Judge in Session Trial No. 8 of 2017 State vs. Narendra Sah,
whereby the learned Judge acquitted the accused person under
section 376 IPC on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction with
the  liberty  to  proceed  prosecution  against  the  accused  in  the
appropriate Court. 
I have perused the impugned judgment and papers on record. 
It is settled proposition of law that in a case where the accused
has been acquitted by the trial court and even if two views are
possible, it is not just and proper on the part of the appellate court
to reverse the finding of acquittal recorded by the court below
unless the findings of court below are perverse. 
I find no perversity, illegality and jurisdictional error in the order
impugned. 
Accordingly, the revision lacks merit and dismissed.” 
8.The  aforesaid  orders  as  passed  by  the  High  Court  and  the
Sessions Judge are in challenge in the present appeal. Before adverting
to the stand of the respective parties and the rival contentions, another
relevant fact could be taken note of at this juncture, which relates to the
trial for the aforesaid offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC.
9.As noticed, in the impugned order dated 28.10.2017, the learned
Sessions Judge, while discharging the accused-respondent No. 2 of the
offence  under  Section  376  IPC  on  the  ground  of  lack  of  territorial
jurisdiction, had transferred the matter to the Court of Judicial Magistrate
8First Class, Gairsain, District Chamoli for trial of the respondent No. 2 in
relation to the remaining offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC. The
said matter was taken up for trial by the learned Judicial Magistrate in
Criminal Case No. 137 of 2017. In this trial, the appellant and other
witnesses were indeed examined by the prosecution and ultimately, the
case was decided by the learned Judicial Magistrate by his judgment and
order dated 01.05.2019. A perusal of the said judgment and order dated
01.05.2019  makes  out  that  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate,  after
appreciation of evidence, found that the prosecution witnesses had failed
to establish the fact that the accused-respondent No. 2 hurled abuses or
gave death threats to the appellant and her family. The said finding of the
learned  Judicial  Magistrate,  leading  to  acquittal  of  the  accused-
respondent No. 2 of the offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC, reads
as under: -
“None of the prosecution witnesses in their testimonies have
stated that the Accused Narender Singh Shah hurled abuses or
gave death threats to the Petitioner as well as her family. The
testimonies led on record for evidence by the Prosecution against
the  Accused  and  the  documentary  evidence  do  not  prove  the
charges against the Accused under Section 504 and 506 of the
IPC. This is how the Prosecution was unable to prove its case
against  the  Accused.  Even  though  the  Prosecution  led  the
testimonies of PW1 to PW6 on record, they were unable to prove
the case against the Accused that he hurled abuses and gave
death  threats  to  the  Complainant.  Therefore,  the  Accused
Narender Shah is acquitted of the offences under Section 504,
506 of the IPC.”
10.Having  taken  note  of  the  material  facts  and  relevant  orders
pertaining  to  this  case,  we  may  now  summarise  the  respective
contentions, where the submission made on behalf of the appellant in
9challenge to the order dated 25.09.2018, as passed by the High Court as
also the order dated 28.10.2017, as passed by the Sessions Judge have
been  duly  supported  in  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
respondent No. 1-State; and duly countered on behalf of the accused-
respondent No. 2. 
11.Learned counsel for the appellant has strenuously argued that in
this case, the accused-respondent No. 2 has wrongly been discharged of
the offence under Section 376 IPC without the learned Sessions Judge
appreciating that the offences forming the part of the same transaction
could  not  have  been  segregated  on  the  ground  of  want  of  territorial
jurisdiction. The learned counsel has particularly referred to Sections 178
and 179 with Section 220 CrPC and has emphasized that in this case, the
offences pertaining to Sections 376, 504 and 506 IPC formed the part of
same  transaction  and  their  segregation,  as  ordered  by  the  learned
Sessions  Judge  in  the  order  dated  28.10.2017,  has  resulted  in
miscarriage  of  justice.  In  support  of  these  contentions,  the  learned
counsel has relied upon the decision in the case of  Satvinder Kaur v.
State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) and Anr. : (1999) 8 SCC 728.
11.1.Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted, with elaborate
reference to contents of the complaint as stated in Judicial Magistrate’s
order dated 21.01.2017 and to the statements made by the appellant,
including that in the trial of the respondent No. 2 for the offences under
Sections 504 and 506 IPC, that the appellant has consistently maintained
10her stand that she was subjected to forcible sexual intercourse by the
respondent  No.  2  on  the  threat  of  ending  the  matrimonial  alliance.
Learned counsel would argue that in view of this consistent stand of the
appellant, the respondent No. 2 ought to have been put to trial for the
offence under Section 376 IPC, which could not have been segregated
from other offences. The learned counsel has also referred to Section 90
IPC to submit that the consent given by the appellant for having physical
relationship under fear or misconception could not have been treated as a
valid consent; and even as per the presumption provided by Section 114-
A of the Evidence Act, 1872, the respondent No. 2 ought to face trial for
the offence under Section 376 IPC. A decision of this Court in the case of
State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh and Ors. : (1996) 2 SCC 384 has also
been referred as regards the value and worth attached by the Courts to
the assertions of a victim of sexual offence. 
11.2.Learned counsel for the appellant has further argued that the trial
in Case No. 137 of 2017 for offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC,
where the accused-respondent No. 2 was acquitted by the order dated
01.05.2019, deserves to be quashed because this trial has taken place
before the Judicial Magistrate only because of segregation of the said
offences with the offence under Section 376 IPC, which is triable only by
the Court of Sessions. The submission has been that, by setting aside the
order of segregation, the entire matter deserves to be put to trial for the
11offence under Section 376 IPC along with the offences under Sections
504 and 506 IPC. 
11.3.It has also been argued on behalf of the appellant that while the
learned  Sessions  Judge  had  erroneously  discharged  the  accused-
respondent No. 2 of the offence under Section 376 IPC on the ground of
lack of territorial jurisdiction, the High Court summarily dismissed the
petition without giving any reason as to its conclusion. It has further been
pointed out that the High Court has wrongly recorded as if the accused-
respondent No. 2 was acquitted of the offence under Section 376 IPC
without appreciating that it had not been a case of acquittal in terms of
Section 232 CrPC but had been of discharge in terms of Section 227
CrPC.
12.While  supporting  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
appellant, learned counsel for the respondent No. 1-State has submitted
that  the  Sessions  Judge,  Chamoli  was  indeed  competent  to  try  the
accused-respondent No.2 for the offence under Section 376 IPC along
with the offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC, for the said offences
formed the series of same transaction. Learned counsel for the State has
particularly referred to Sections 178(d), 179, 180, 184 read with Sections
220(1) and 220(3) CrPC.
12.1.Learned counsel for the State has further contended that the trial
conducted  by  the  Judicial  Magistrate  First  Class,  Gairsain,  District
Chamoli in relation to the charges under Sections 504 and 506 IPC after
12segregation of the charge under Section 376 IPC stands vitiated in terms
of  Clause  (l)  of  Section  461  CrPC. Hence,  according  to  the  learned
counsel, de novo trial of the accused under Sections 376, 504 and 506
IPC is required to be conducted by the Court of Sessions Judge, Chamoli.
 12.2.Learned counsel for the State has also referred to a couple of
decisions of this Court to submit that in the offence of rape, the solitary
evidence of prosecutrix, if it inspires confidence, is sufficient to hold the
accused guilty without any need of corroboration. The learned counsel
would  submit  that  in  the  present  case,  where  the  prosecutrix  has
consistently  maintained  in  the  FIR  as  also  in  the  statements  under
Sections 161 and 164 CrPC, that she was forced by the respondent No. 2
to establish physical relations under the threat of cancelling the marriage,
the offence under Section 376 IPC is clearly made out.
13.Per contra , learned counsel for the accused-respondent No. 2 has
argued that in terms of Section 218 CrPC, the learned Sessions Judge,
Chamoli has rightly ordered for separation of charge in relation to Section
376 CrPC and has rightly not proceeded with the same for the alleged
occurrence having taken place at Delhi.
13.1.Learned counsel for the accused-respondent No. 2 would submit
that in terms of Section 218 CrPC, separate charges are required to the
framed for separate offences and they are to be tried separately. It has
been contended that in the present case, the learned Sessions Judge
rightly  took  into  account  the  fact  that  though  the  appellant  and  the
13respondent No. 2 got engaged at their native place in District Chamoli,
Uttarakhand but, the alleged incident of physical relationship or sexual
intercourse  occurred  only  at  Delhi  in  the  tenanted  premises  of  the
respondent No. 2. Thus, according to the learned counsel, the offence
under Section 376 IPC had rightly been segregated and the respondent
No.  2  had  rightly  been  discharged  on  account  of  lack  of  territorial
jurisdiction of the Courts at Chamoli in relation to the said offence. It has
also been argued that even in relation to Sections 178 and 179 CrPC, the
evidence collected during investigation made it clear that the alleged
offence under Section 376 IPC had taken place only at Delhi; that the
offence of rape is not a continuing offence; and that the alleged threat
given by the respondent No. 2 to the appellant on phone had not been a
kind of offence which could be said to be of a series of acts forming the
same transaction. The learned counsel has referred to the case of Sunita
Kumari Kashyap v. State of Bihar and Anr. : (2011) 11 SCC 301  and
has  submitted  that  looking  to  the  nature  of  accusations,  the  matter
relating to the offence under Section 376 IPC had rightly been segregated
in the present case. 
13.2.Learned  counsel  has  further  submitted  that  the  accused-
respondent No. 2 has been duly acquitted of the charges pertaining to
Sections 504 and 506 IPC by the learned Judicial Magistrate with a clear
finding that the appellant had failed to furnish any material evidence in
relation to those allegations. It is submitted that the judgment of acquittal
14dated  01.05.2019  as  passed  by  the  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  has
attained finality and in that view of the matter too, the alleged offence
under Section 376 IPC cannot hold ground any further.
13.3.A long length of arguments on behalf of the respondent No. 2 has
also been to the effect that the FIR by the appellant is based on vague
and concocted story and has been put forward by the appellant only to
harass and arm-twist the respondent No. 2 because of non-solemnization
of  the  proposed  marriage.  Learned  counsel  would  submit  that  the
respondent No. 2 is being harassed by the appellant for last more than 5
years; that there had been an inordinate delay of 1 year in registration of
FIR from the alleged date of incident at Delhi on 21.02.2016; that criminal
machinery  cannot  be  used  to  further  the  object  of  harassment  and
vengeance; and that the life and liberty of the respondent No. 2 are under
severe risk at the hand of the appellant because of baseless allegations. 
13.4.As regards the contents of the impugned order of High Court, it
has been argued on behalf of the respondent No. 2 that the use of
expression ‘acquittal’ in place of the expression ‘discharge’ had only been
a matter of human error, though the order under challenge was duly
examined by the High Court. It has also been submitted that, in fact, such
an error occurred for there being no assistance from the side of the
appellant, who was the revisionist before the High Court. It is submitted
that, in any case, such an error does not take away the substance of the
matter that the High Court found no reason to interfere with the just and
15proper order passed by the learned Sessions Judge in discharging the
appellant of the offence under Section 376 IPC for want of territorial
jurisdiction.     
14.We have given anxious consideration to the rival submissions and
have examined the record with reference to the law applicable.
15.As noticed, the principal question calling for determination in the
present  case  is  as  to  whether  the  allegations  against  the  accused-
respondent  No.  2,  of  committing  rape,  hurling  abuses  and  extending
threats, respectively pertaining to offences under Sections 376, 504 and
506 IPC, could be said to be ‘ one series of acts so connected together as
to form the same transaction ’ for the purpose of trial together in terms of
Section 220 CrPC? 
16.Before dealing with the principal and material question involved in
this case, it appears just and appropriate to comment on two peripheral
aspects, which need not detain us much longer. 
16.1.The first of these marginal aspects is about the nature of order
passed by the High Court in this case. Though we have taken note of the
rival contentions in that regard but, it is rather unnecessary to deal with
them elaborately. It is not a matter of much debate that the High Court
has dealt with the revision petition before it in a wholly cursory manner
and with erroneous assumption as if it were a case of challenge to the
order  of  acquittal.  However,  as  observed  at  the  outset,  rather  than
adopting the course of remanding the matter for reconsideration by the
16High  Court,  we  have  considered  it  just  and  proper  to  deal  with  the
relevant question, relating to the validity of the order dated 28.10.2017 as
passed by the learned Sessions Judge, on its merits in this appeal itself.
Therefore, without any further comments on this part of rival contentions,
we would leave the order passed by the High Court at that only. 
16.2.Another aspect, which too is peripheral to the material question
involved  in  this  matter,  is  that  of  rival  stands  on  the  correctness  or
otherwise of the allegations of rape, as levelled against the respondent
No. 2. As noticed, a long deal of arguments on behalf of the appellant
pertains to the merits of such accusations and as to how the matter
relating to consent ought to be dealt with and as to the value and worth
attached by the Courts to the statements of a victim of sexual offence.
Learned counsel for the State has also joined this line of arguments and
has submitted that the solitary evidence of prosecutrix could be sufficient
to hold the accused guilty in the offence of rape. In these contentions, the
alleged consistent stand of the appellant has also been referred.  Per
contra, it has been urged on behalf of the respondent No. 2 that the
allegations of rape are of a concocted story, which has been put forward
only for the purpose of continuing with his harassment. It has also been
contended that the FIR was lodged after an inordinate delay. In our view,
these and correlated contentions concerning the merits of the accusations
of rape need neither any adjudication nor even any comment in this
appeal. The limited question to be considered in this appeal is concerning
17validity of the order passed by the learned Sessions Judge, segregating
the  offences  and  discharging  the  accused-respondent  No.  2  of  the
offence under Section 376 IPC for want of territorial jurisdiction. At the
present stage, it is too premature to address the questions pertaining to
the merits of these accusations. The relevant aspect at the present stage
is that after investigation, charge-sheet was indeed filed for prosecution of
the respondent No. 2 for the offences under Sections 376, 504 and 506
IPC but, the prosecution in relation to the offence under Section 376 IPC
did not proceed at Chamoli for the view taken by the learned Sessions
Judge on territorial jurisdiction. Therefore, this part of the contentions,
relating to the merits of accusations of rape, is also left at that only and
without any further comment.
17.Reverting now to the principal question involved in the matter, we
need  to  take  into  comprehension  the  relevant  and  referred  statutory
provisions, as contained in Sections 177, 178, 179, 180, 184, 218 and
220 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, which read as under: -
“177. Ordinary place of inquiry and trial.  -  Every offence shall
ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction it was committed.
178.  Place of inquiry or trial. -  (a) When it is uncertain in which
of several local areas an offence was committed, or
(b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area and
partly in another, or
(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be
committed in more local areas than one, or
(d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas, it
may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over
any of such local areas.
179.   Offence  triable  where  act  is  done  or  consequence
ensues. - When an act is an offence by reason of anything which
18has been done and of a consequence which has ensued, the
offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has
ensued.
180.   Place  of  trial  where  act  is  an  offence  by  reason  of
relation to other offence . - When an act is an offence by reason
of its relation to any other act which is also an offence or which
would be an offence if the doer were capable of committing an
offence, the first-mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried
by a Court within whose local jurisdiction either act was done.
184.  Place of trial for offences triable together. -  Where-
(a) the offences committed by any person are such that he may be
charged with, and tried at one trial for, each such offence by virtue
of the provisions of section 219, section 220 or section 221, or
(b) the offence or offences committed by several persons are such
that they may be charged with and tried together by virtue of the
provisions of section 223, 
the offences may be inquired into or tried by any Court competent
to inquire into or try any of the offences.
218.  Separate  charges  for  distinct  offences.  -(1)  For  every
distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be a
separate charge and every such charge shall be tried separately:
Provided that where the accused person, by an application in
writing,  so  desires  and  the  Magistrate  is  of  opinion  that  such
person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby the Magistrate may try
together all or any number of the charges framed against such
person. 
(2)Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of
the provisions of sections 219, 220, 221 and 223.
220. Trial for more than one offence. -  (1) If, in one series of
acts so connected together as to form the same transaction, more
offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be
charged with, and tried at one trial for, every such offence.
(2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal
breach  of  trust  or  dishonest  misappropriation  of  property  as
provided in sub-section (2) of section 212 or in sub-section (1) of
section  219,  is  accused  of  committing,  for  the  purpose  of
facilitating or concealing the commission of that offence or those
offences, one or more offences of falsification of accounts, he may
be charged with, and tried at one trial for, every such offence.
(3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or
more separate definitions of any law in force for the time being by
which offences are defined or punished, the person accused of
them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such
offences.
(4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or
themselves  constitute  an  offence,  constitute  when  combined  a
19different offence, the person accused of them may be charged
with, and tried at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts
when combined, and for any offence constituted by any one, or
more, or such acts.
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 71 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).”
18.At this juncture, we may also take note of the decisions cited by
the  learned  counsel  for  the  contesting  parties  in  support  of  their
respective contentions pertaining to the principal question involved in the
matter.
18.1.In the case of Satvinder Kaur  (supra), the  facts in brief were that
the appellant was thrown out of her matrimonial home in Patiala, Punjab.
She  lodged  a  complaint  at  Police  Station  Kotwali,  Patiala  on  the
allegations of torture and dowry demand against the husband and in-
laws. Thereafter, she came to Delhi to live with her parents. Within that
time  also,  threats  by  her  husband  continued.  The  appellant  filed  a
complaint with the Women’s Cell, Delhi and subsequently lodged an FIR
relating to the offences under Sections 406 and 498-A IPC at Police
Station Paschim Vihar, New Delhi. A question was raised by the accused
as  regards  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the  Station  House  Officer,  Police
Station Paschim Vihar, New Delhi to investigate the FIR as the dowry
items were entrusted at Patiala and the alleged cause of action arose at
Patiala. To this, the High Court took the view that the said Investigating
Officer at New Delhi had no territorial jurisdiction. This view of the High
Court was, however, not approved by this Court while observing,  inter
alia, as under: - 
20“15. Hence, in the present case, the High Court committed a grave
error  in  accepting  the  contention  of  the  respondent  that  the
investigating officer had no jurisdiction to investigate the matters
on the alleged ground that no part of the offence was committed
within the territorial jurisdiction of the police station at Delhi. The
appreciation of the evidence is the function of the courts when
seized of the matter. At the stage of investigation, the material
collected by an investigating officer cannot be judicially scrutinized
for  arriving  at  a conclusion  that  the  police  station  officer  of  a
particular police station would not have territorial jurisdiction. In
any case, it has to be stated that in view of Section 178( c) of the
Criminal Procedure Code, when it is uncertain in which of the
several local areas an offence was committed, or where it consists
of several acts done in different local areas, the said offence can
be enquired into or tried by a court having jurisdiction over any of
such local areas. Therefore, to say at the stage of investigation
that the SHO, Police Station Paschim Vihar, New Delhi was not
having  territorial  jurisdiction,  is  on  the  face  of  it,  illegal  and
erroneous. That apart, Section 156(2) contains an embargo that
no proceeding of a police officer shall be challenged on the ground
that he has no territorial power to investigate. The High Court has
completely overlooked the said embargo when it entertained the
petition  of  Respondent  2  on  the  ground  of  want  of  territorial
jurisdiction.” 
18.2.  In the case of Sunita Kumari Kashyap  (supra), the appellant-wife
lodged an FIR for offences under Sections 498-A, 406 read with Section
34 IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 at Gaya
while alleging that she suffered ill-treatment and cruelty at the hands of
her husband and in-laws at Ranchi; that she was forcibly brought to her
parental home at Gaya; that after she gave birth to a girl child, she was
blamed for having brought an additional burden; and that after some time,
her husband came out with a new demand that unless her father gave
him the house at Gaya, she would not be taken back to her matrimonial
home at Ranchi. On the similar question of jurisdiction, the High Court
held that the proceedings at Gaya were not maintainable. However, this
Court did not approve of the order so passed by the High Court and in
21that context, after referring to Sections 177, 178 and 179 CrPC, this Court
observed and explained as under: -
“8…. From the above provisions, it is clear that the normal rule is
that the offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a court
within whose local jurisdiction it was committed. However, when it
is  uncertain  in  which  of  several  local  areas  an  offence  was
committed or where an offence is committed partly in one local
area and partly in another or where an offence is a continuing one,
and continues to be committed in more than one local area and
takes place in different local areas as per Section 178, the court
having jurisdiction over any of such local areas is competent to
inquire into and try the offence. Section 179 makes it clear that if
anything happened as a consequence of the offence, the same
may  be  inquired  into  or  tried  by  a  court  within  whose  local
jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has
ensued.”
18.2.1. While applying the principles to the facts of the case, this Court
held that the offence of ill-treatment and humiliation meted out to the
appellant was a continuing one; the same was committed in more than
one local areas; and one of the local areas being Gaya, the learned
Magistrate at Gaya was having jurisdiction to proceed with the criminal
case instituted therein. This Court observed and held as under: -
“18. …In view of the specific assertion by the appellant wife about
the ill-treatment and cruelty at the hands of the husband and his
relatives at Ranchi and of the fact that because of their action, she
was taken to her parental home at Gaya by her husband with a
threat of dire consequences for not fulfilling their demand of dowry,
we hold that in view of Sections 178 and 179 of the Code, the
offence in this case was a continuing one having been committed
in more local areas and one of the local areas being Gaya, the
learned Magistrate at Gaya has jurisdiction to proceed with the
criminal case instituted therein. In other words, as the offence was
a  continuing  one  and  the  episode  at  Gaya  was  only  a
consequence of continuing offence of harassment and ill-treatment
meted  out  to  the  complainant,  clause  ( c)  of  Section  178  is
attracted...”
2219.A few salient features of both the decisions aforesaid in Satvinder
Kaur and Sunita Kumari Kashyap could be usefully recounted. 
19.1.As noticed, in the case of Satvinder Kaur  (supra), the question of
jurisdiction was raised at the investigation stage. In that context, this
Court pointed out that at the stage of investigation, the material collected
by the investigating officer cannot be judicially scrutinized for arriving at a
conclusion that the particular officer or a particular police station would
not have territorial jurisdiction. This Court also referred to clause (c) of
Section 178 CrPC, as regards jurisdiction in case of uncertainty of the
area/areas of commission of offence. In continuity, this Court pointed out,
with reference to Section 156(2) CrPC, that no proceeding of a police
officer  is  to  be  challenged  on  the  ground  of  power  to  investigate.
Noticeable it is that in the said case, the appellant had made allegations
of torture and dowry demand at Patiala and it was also alleged that after
her coming to Delhi to live with her parents, the threats by her husband
continued. The complaint  had  essentially been  of the  offences under
Sections 406 and 498-A IPC, whether at Patiala or at Delhi. In the case of
Sunita Kumari Kashyap  (supra), this Court has summarised the rules
discernible from a combined reading of Sections 177, 178 and 179 CrPC
but, in the said case, again, the complaint was of the offences pertaining
to Sections 406 and 498-A IPC as also Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition  Act,  1961,  essentially  relating  to  ill-treatment,  cruelty  and
demands by the husband and his relatives; and as per the factual matrix,
23such acts took place at Ranchi and continued at Gaya. Hence, this Court
found the said case to be that of continuing offence. 
19.2.Apart from the fact that the case of Satvinder Kaur  (supra) was
that  of  raising  the  question  of  jurisdiction  at  the  threshold  stage  of
investigation (which was not approved by this Court), the fundamental
fact  remains  that  in  each  of  these  cases,  the  principal  offences,  of
Sections 406 and 498-A IPC, were said to have been committed at the
matrimonial home of the lady and were allegedly continued even when
the lady had shifted to her parental home at a different station. In such a
situation, clause (c) of Section 178 CrPC came in operation, dealing with
the eventuality when ‘ an offence is a continuing one and continues to be
committed in more local areas than one ’. 
19.2.The  provisions  of  Section  178  CrPC  essentially  deal  with  a
singular offence which is either partly committed in one area and partly in
another; or continues to be committed in more local areas than one; or it
consists  of  several  acts  done  in  different  local  areas;  or  when  it  is
uncertain of which of the  several  areas it has been committed.  This
provision primarily operates in relation to one and the same offence,
which gets bifurcated into, or is spread over, different local areas because
of continuing acts or different acts, one after another, like the offences of
Section 498-A or Section 406 IPC in the referred cases. Then, in the
eventuality of an act being an offence for anything which has been done
and consequence that has ensued, as per Section 179 CrPC, the offence
24could be tried by a Court within whose jurisdiction the act has been done
or where the consequence of such an act has ensued. Further, as per
Section 180 CrPC, when an act is an offence because of its relation to
any other act which is also an offence, the former could be tried by a
Court within whose local jurisdiction either of the act is done. These
provisions provide exception to the normal rule envisaged by Section 177
CrPC that every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a
Court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed.
19.3.Both the decisions aforesaid, though dealing with the operation of
Section 178 CrPC, do not directly render assistance in the present case.
The fact situation of the present case is different. It is not the case of an
offence comprising of bifurcated or segmented or continuing acts. 
20.The fact situation of the present case and the complaint as made
by the appellant is of the allegations of different offences, of different
nature and at different places of occurrence, though said to have been
committed by the same person, i.e., respondent No. 2 and against the
same person, i.e., the appellant and having their genesis in the proposed
matrimonial alliance, which did not materialise. The allegations, obviously,
consist of offences of distinct nature inasmuch as one set of allegations is
of the offence of rape at Delhi (Section 376 IPC) and the other set of
allegations  is of  hurling  abuses  and  extending  threat  on  phone  calls
received by the appellant at her village in District Chamoli (Sections 504
and  506  IPC).  These  being  different  offences,  the  question  to  be
25examined with reference to Section 220 CrPC read with Section 184
CrPC is as to whether the alleged offences are such that the respondent
No. 2 could be charged with and tried at one trial for each of them. In
other words, as noticed, the question in this case is as to whether the acts
complained of could be said to be ‘ one series of acts so connected
together as to form the same transaction ’ for the purpose of trial together.
For dealing with the question in reference to the peculiar facts of the
present  case,  the  principles  stated  in  a  few  other  decisions  may  be
usefully noticed.
20.1.In the case of  Mohan Baitha and Ors. v. State of Bihar and
Anr.: (2001) 4 SCC 350, this Court observed that the expression ‘ same
transaction ’, from its very nature, was incapable of an exact definition and
it was not possible to enunciate any comprehensive formula of universal
application for  the  purpose  of determining whether  two or  more acts
constitute  the  same  transaction.  However,  this  Court  indicated  a  few
factors, which would be relevant to decide this question in a given set of
facts. In that case, on the complaint of the father of deceased, FIR was
lodged for offences under Sections 304-B/34/406 IPC at Police Station
Nath Nagar in the District of Bhagalpur, Bihar. Police report was filed on
03.04.1999  after  completion  of  investigation.  However,  the  accused
approached the High Court, seeking direction to the Magistrate not to
proceed with the matter on the grounds of lack of territorial jurisdiction, as
the offence under Section 304-B IPC had taken place at Jahanaganj in
26the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Court at Bhagalpur was lacking in
territorial  jurisdiction  to  try  the  same.  The  High  Court  dismissed  the
petition of the accused. In further appeal, this Court also observed that
the acts formed parts of the same transaction, which came under the
ambit of Section 220 CrPC; and directed the Magistrate at Bhagalpur to
proceed with the matter expeditiously. This Court, while expounding on
Sections 177 and 220 CrPC, observed and laid down as under: - 
“4.......Section 177 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on which Mr
Mishra relies, uses the expression “ordinarily”. The use of the word
“ordinarily” indicates that the provision is a general one and must
be read subject to the special provisions contained in the Criminal
Procedure Code. That apart, this Court has taken the view that the
exceptions implied by the word “ordinarily” need not be limited to
those specially provided for by the law and exceptions may be
provided  by  law  on  considerations  of  convenience  or  may  be
implied from other provisions of law permitting joint trial of offences
by the same court.......  It may be noticed that under Section 220 of
the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  offences  more  than  one
committed by the same persons could be tried at one trial, if they
can be held to be in one series of acts, so as to form the same
transaction.  The  expression  “same  transaction”  from  its  very
nature is incapable of an exact definition. It is not intended to be
interpreted in any artificial or technical sense. Common sense and
the ordinary use of language must decide whether on the facts of
a particular case, it can be held to be in one transaction. It is not
possible  to  enunciate  any  comprehensive  formula  of  universal
application for the purpose of determining whether two or more
acts constitute the same transaction.  But the circumstances of a
given case indicating proximity of time, unity or proximity of place,
continuity of action and community of purpose or design are the
factors for deciding whether certain acts form parts of the same
transaction  or  not.  Therefore  a  series  of  acts  whether  are  so
connected together as to form the same transaction is purely a
question of fact to be decided on the aforesaid criteria.”
    (emphasis supplied)
20.2.The  said  decision  in  Mohan  Baitha  (supra)  has  further  been
referred to and relied upon by this Court in the case of Anju Chaudhary
v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr. : (2013) 6 SCC 384  while indicating
27the tests to be applied for determining the question as to whether two or
more  acts  constitute  the  same  transaction.  This  Court  observed  and
explained as under: -
“43. It is true that law recognises common trial or a common FIR
being registered for one series of acts so connected together as to
form the same transaction as contemplated under Section 220 of
the  Code.  There  cannot  be  any  straitjacket  formula,  but  this
question has to be answered on the facts of each case. This Court
in Mohan Baitha  v. State of Bihar  (SCC pp. 354-55, para 4) held
that  the  expression  “same  transaction”  from  its  very  nature  is
incapable of exact definition. It is not intended to be interpreted in
any artificial or technical sense. Common sense in the ordinary
use of language must decide whether or not in the very facts of a
case, it can be held to be one transaction.
44. It  is  not  possible  to  enunciate  any  formula  of  universal
application for the purpose of determining whether two or more
acts  constitute  the  same  transaction.  Such  things  are  to  be
gathered  from  the  circumstances  of  a  given  case  indicating
proximity of time, unity or proximity of place, continuity of action,
commonality of purpose or design.  Where two incidents are of
different times with involvement of different persons, there is no
commonality and the purpose thereof different and they emerge
from different circumstances, it will not be possible for the court to
take  a  view  that  they  form  part  of  the  same  transaction  and
therefore, there could be a common FIR or subsequent FIR could
not be permitted to be registered or there could be common trial.
45. Similarly,  for  several  offences  to  be  part  of  the  same
transaction, the test which has to be applied is whether they are so
related to one another in point of purpose or of cause and effect,
or as principal and subsidiary, so as to result in one continuous
action. Thus, where there is a commonality of purpose or design,
where  there  is  a  continuity  of  action,  then  all  those  persons
involved  can  be  accused  of  the  same  or  different  offences
“committed in the course of the same transaction”. ”
    (emphasis supplied)
20.3.Thus,  in  the  aforesaid  decisions  in  Mohan  Baitha  and  Anju
Chaudhary ,  this  Court  has  underscored  that  the  expression  ‘ same
transaction ’ seems to be having vague underpinnings; and this Court has
also  pointed  out  that  no  formula  of  universal  application  could  be
enunciated for determining as to whether two or more acts constitute the
28same transaction. However, even while pointing out that the question as
to whether a series of acts are so connected together as to form the same
transaction is purely a question of fact, this Court has indicated the core
elements like proximity of time, unity or proximity of place, continuity of
action  and  community  of  purpose  or  design,  which  are  of  relevant
considerations and when these factors are applied to common sense and
ordinary use of language, the vexed question of ‘ same transaction ’ could
be reasonably determined.  
21.Keeping the aforesaid principles in view, we may examine as to
whether the series of acts as alleged in the present case could be said to
be so connected together as to form the same transaction. This is a pure
question of fact and has been decided by the learned Sessions Judge
against the appellant essentially on the considerations that the place of
occurrence of alleged offence of rape was at Delhi; the offence of rape
was not a continuing offence; and alleged threats given by the respondent
No. 2 to the appellant on phone were not constituting such offences as to
form a series of acts with the first-mentioned offence of rape. We have no
hesitation in endorsing the views of the learned Sessions Judge on the
facts of the present case. 
22.In the present case, according to the appellant, her engagement
with the respondent No. 2 took place on 13.11.2015 at village Dangidhar,
Tehsil Gairsain, District Chamoli; later on, the accused-respondent No. 2
asked  her  to  come  to  Delhi  for  purchasing  and  she  did  so,  albeit
29reluctantly and on the alleged threat of the accused-respondent No. 2 to
break the engagement; from 21.02.2016 to 24.02.2016, the accused-
respondent No. 2 allegedly had had sexual intercourse with the appellant
against her wishes and on the threat of dropping the matrimonial alliance;
the  accused  later  on  allegedly  asked  her  to  bring  Rs.  25  lakhs  for
construction of house and he would marry only upon receiving the money;
the appellant’s mother filed a complaint at Police Station Gairsain where
the accused-respondent No. 2 allegedly filed an affidavit on 01.11.2016
assuring  to  marry  the  appellant  in  the  month  of  December,  2016;
however, he did not marry the appellant and instead, hurled abuses and
threatened to kill her. As per the statement recorded by the appellant
under Section 164 CrPC, she had also visited Delhi on 23.03.2016 on the
asking of the accused-respondent No.2 and at that time, the accused
made physical relationship twice with her consent, which was given on
the pretext of marriage.
22.1.A close look at the alleged events/acts bring to fore the basic
feature that on 13.11.2015, the appellant and the respondent No. 2 were
engaged  for  matrimonial  alliance  at  their  village  Dangidhar,  Tehsil
Gairsain,  District  Chamoli  but,  the  proposal  of  marriage  did  not
materialise. However, the alleged acts of sexual relationship took place at
Delhi in the months of February and March, 2016. The other alleged acts
had been of the respondent No. 2 hurling abuses and extending threats in
or around the month of November, 2016, which the appellant received
30over telephone at her village. The acts in question were neither proximate
in  time  nor  proximate  in  place;  they  were  not  of  continuity  either.
Significantly, while the appellant had alleged that she submitted to the
sexual acts because of the threat by the respondent No.2 to snap the
proposed alliance but it had not been her case that the respondent No. 2
attempted to coerce her into the same physical relationship while hurling
abuses or threatening to kill at the later part of time. Thus, it is difficult to
find continuity of actions and community of purpose or design in two
different acts leading to two different set of offences, i.e., one under
Section 376 IPC and the other under Sections 504/506 IPC. Putting it
differently, so far as the act leading to the offence of rape under Section
376 IPC is concerned, even as per the allegations of the appellant, that
particular act was a completed one and the original design of subjecting
the  appellant  to  physical  relations  was  accomplished  at  Delhi  in  the
months of February and March, 2016. As noticed, there is no allegation of
such an activity having continued later or having taken place at Chamoli
or even any threat having been extended to the appellant to again submit
to  such  an  activity.  Viewed  from  this  angle  too,  the  completed  act
concerning  one  offence  (Section  376  IPC)  could  not  have  been
connected with the other acts leading to other offences.
22.2.From whatever angle we examine the matter, in the given set of
facts, it is difficult to sew the alleged acts together so as to form the same
transaction. To put it in a simple idiom, the two alleged set of acts, one of
31sexual exploitation, leading to the offence of rape (Section 376 IPC) and
another of hurling abuses and threats, leading to the offences of insult
and intimidation (Sections 504/506 IPC), are just like chalk and cheese;
they cannot be connected together so as to form the same transaction on
the facts of this case. 
23.For what has been discussed hereinabove, the view as taken by
the learned Sessions Judge commends to us that on the facts of this
case, the offence under Section 376 IPC as allegedly committed at Delhi,
being different and distinct than the other offences and being not of same
transaction,  could  not  have  been  tried  by  the  Courts  at  Chamoli.
Therefore, the order passed by the learned Sessions Judge calls for no
interference.
24.Another aspect of the matter pertains to the impact, implication
and  consequences  of  the  judgment  and  order  dated  01.05.2019  as
passed by the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Gairsain, District Chamoli in
Criminal Case No. 137 of 2017, whereby the accused-respondent No. 2
has been acquitted of the offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC, as
also  the  validity  of  such  proceedings  before  the  learned  Judicial
Magistrate. 
24.1.It has been suggested on behalf of the respondent No. 1-State
that the segregation of charge of the offence under Section 376 IPC had
been erroneous and because of this error, the matter went to trial before
the learned Judicial Magistrate for the offences under Sections 504 and
32506  IPC  though  the  entire  matter  ought  to  be  tried  in  the  Court  of
Sessions.  Section  461  CrPC  has  been  referred  to  in  that  regard.
Although, for what has been discussed and held hereinbefore, there had
been no error in segregation of the charge of the offence under Section
376 IPC, yet it need be stated that this line of submissions, questioning
the validity of the proceedings before the learned Judicial Magistrate,
remains baseless and is rather misplaced. Section 461 CrPC with its
relied upon clause (l) reads as under: -
“461.  Irregularities  which  vitiate  proceedings.  -  If  any
Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, does any
of the following things, namely: -
…. ….….
(l) tries an offender;
….….….
his proceedings shall be void.”
24.1.1. So far as the offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC are
concerned, it cannot be said that the said Judicial Magistrate was not
empowered  by  law  to  try  these  offences.  Rather,  the  offence  under
Section 504 IPC is triable by any Magistrate. In the present case, the
alleged threat was to cause death which relates to Part II of Section 506
IPC and is triable by a Judicial Magistrate of First Class. It is not the case
that the Magistrate concerned who had tried the matter was in any way
lacking in power and authority to try the offences under Sections 504 and
506 IPC. The validity and correctness of the order of segregation of the
charge under Section 376 IPC is a matter entirely different but until the
said order was in operation, the matter had to go to the trial before the
33said Magistrate and he was bound to proceed with the same. Hence, this
contention on behalf of the respondent No. 1-State stands rejected.
24.2.We may also observe that the accused-respondent No. 2 having
gone through the trial in relation to offences under Sections 504 and 506
IPC and having been acquitted, cannot be subjected to another trial for
the same charges on the same facts. Any such process would be in
blatant  disregard  of  the  settled  principles  which  disapprove  double
jeopardy and are precisely contained in Article 20(2) of the Constitution of
India as also Section 300 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The
protection under clause (2) of Article 20 of the Constitution of India is
clear and unambiguous in the following terms: -
“20. Protection in respect of conviction for offences. -
…. ….….
(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same
offence more than once.
…. ….….”
24.2.1.Section 300 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 reads as
under: -
“300. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried
for same offence. - 
(1) A person who has once been tried by a Court of competent
jurisdiction  for  an  offence  and  convicted  or  acquitted  of  such
offence shall, while such conviction or acquittal remains in force,
not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the
same facts for any other offence for which a different charge from
the one made against him might have been made under sub-
section  (1)  of  section  221,  or  for  which  he  might  have  been
convicted under sub-section (2) thereof.
(2) A  person  acquitted  or  convicted  of  any  offence  may  be
afterwards tried, with the consent of the State Government, for any
distinct  offence  for  which  a  separate  charge  might  have  been
34made  against  him  at  the  former  trial  under  sub-section  (1)  of
section 220.
(3) A person  convicted  of  any  offence  constituted  by  any  act
causing consequences which, together with such act, constituted a
different offence from that of which he was convicted, may be
afterwards  tried  for  such  last-mentioned  offence,  if  the
consequences had not happened or were not known to the Court
to have happened, at the time when he was convicted.
(4) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence constituted by
any acts  may,  notwithstanding such acquittal or  conviction,  be
subsequently  charged  with,  and  tried  for,  any  other  offence
constituted by the same acts which he may have committed if the
Court by which he was first tried was not competent to try the
offence with which he is subsequently charged.
(5) A person discharged under section 258 shall not be tried again
for the same offence except with the consent of the Court by which
he  was  discharged  or  of  any  other  Court  to  which  the  first-
mentioned Court is subordinate.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 26
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) or of section 188 of
this Code.
Explanation . - The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge of the
accused, is not an acquittal for the purposes of this section.” 
24.3.In view of the provisions aforesaid, without further elaboration,
suffice it would be to observe that on the facts and in the circumstances
of present case, even if respondent No. 2 is acquitted of charges under
Sections 504 and 506, he could be tried by the jurisdictional Sessions
Court  in  respect  of  alleged  offence  of  rape  under  Section  376  IPC,
because this offence could not have been tried by the Judicial Magistrate
First Class. However, he cannot be sent to trial again for offences under
Sections 504 and 506 IPC in any event. We need not say any more in this
regard. 
25.Upshot of the foregoing discussion is that on the facts and in the
circumstances of this case, the alleged offence under Section 376 IPC
and the other offences under Sections 504 and 506 IPC do not fall within
35the ambit of ‘ one series of acts so connected together as to form the
same transaction ’ for the purpose of trial together in terms of Section 220
CrPC. Thus, the learned Sessions Judge, Chamoli had rightly discharged
the accused-respondent No. 2 of the offence under Section 376 IPC for
want of territorial jurisdiction. 
26.Accordingly, and in view of the above, this appeal fails and is,
therefore, dismissed. 
……....…………………….J.
(DINESH MAHESHWARI)
……....…………………….J.
(VIKRAM NATH)             
NEW DELHI;
JUNE  16, 2022.
36