REPORTABLE
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). …………. OF 2022
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (Crl.) No(s). 7899-7900 of 2015)
MANOJ PRATAP SINGH               …….  APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN         …….  RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
Table of Contents
Preliminary ............................................................................... 2
Relevant factual and background aspects .................................. 7
The Evidence .......................................................................... 11
The Trial Court found the appellant guilty and awarded death 
sentence ................................................................................ 33
Deceased aged 7 ½ years, mentally and physically challenged ........33
Deceased last seen with the appellant ............................................ 34
Discoveries on the information of appellant .................................... 34
1Medical evidence ........................................................................... 35
Report of FSL ................................................................................ 36
Defence contentions rejected ......................................................... 37
Chain of circumstances complete ................................................... 40
Death sentence by the Trial Court .................................................. 41
High Court confirmed the death sentence awarded to the 
appellant ................................................................................ 44
Rival Submissions ................................................................... 48
The scope and width of these appeals ...................................... 61
Procedural questions relating to investigation and trial ............64
Concurrent findings of fact: whether requiring interference? .....67
Whether death sentence be maintained or substituted by any 
other sentence ........................................................................ 80
Death sentence: Evolution of principles and norms ......................... 82
The theory of residual doubt ........................................................ 112
The crime and criminal tests: Aggravating and Mitigating 
circumstances of the present case ................................................ 117
Conclusion ............................................................................ 128
Preliminary
Leave granted
2.These appeals are directed against the common judgment and
order dated 29.05.2015 in D.B. Criminal Murder Reference No. 3 of 2013
2and D.B. Criminal Jail Appeal No. 854 of 2013 whereby, the High Court of
Judicature  for  Rajasthan  at  Jodhpur  has  affirmed  the  judgment  of
conviction dated 28.09.2013 and order of sentencing dated 01.10.2013 in
Sessions Case No. 12 of 2013, as passed by the Court of Special Judge,
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Cases, Rajsamand. 
2.1.The High Court, while upholding conviction of the appellant of
offences punishable under Sections 363, 365, 376(2)(f), 302 of the Indian
Penal  Code, 18601 and Section 6  of the  Protection  of Children  from
Sexual Offences Act, 20122, has confirmed the death sentence awarded
to him by the Trial Court for the offence under Section 302 IPC.
2.2.In addition to the sentence of death for the offence under Section
302  IPC,  the  appellant  has  been  awarded  the  punishments  of
imprisonment for a term of 7 years and fine of Rs. 25,000/- for the offence
under Section 363 IPC; imprisonment for a term of 7 years and fine of Rs.
25,000/- for the offence under Section 365 IPC; imprisonment for life and
a fine of Rs. 50,000/- for the offence under Section 376(2)(f) IPC; and
imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs. 1,00,000/- for the offence under
Section  6  POCSO.  While  providing  for  default  stipulations  of  further
imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine amount, it has also been
provided  that  the  fine  amount  shall  be  given  to  the  mother  of  the
deceased girl as compensation. 
1 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘IPC’.
2 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘POCSO’.
33.In  these  appeals,  the  conviction  of  the  appellant  as  also  the
punishment  awarded  to  him,  particularly  the  capital  punishment,  are
under challenge. Before dealing with the relevant aspects in necessary
details, we may draw a brief sketch and outline of the matter. 
3.1.The appellant has been accused of kidnapping a physically and
mentally challenged seven-and-a-half-year-old girl in front of her parents
from their fruit and vegetable vending cart; having thereafter taken her to
a secluded place; having committed rape upon her; and having killed her
by causing injuries on her head.
3.2.The prosecution case rested on circumstantial evidence to the
effect that the victim was lastly seen with the appellant when he took her
away; that the dead body of victim and other articles related with the
crime were recovered at the instance of the appellant; that the appellant
failed to satisfactorily explain his whereabouts and his knowledge of the
location of dead body; and that the medical and other scientific evidence
was  consistent  with  the  prosecution  case.  Thus,  according  to  the
prosecution, the entire chain of events was complete and was conclusive
of the guilt of the appellant, excluding any other hypothesis. Per contra ,
the appellant asserted that he was falsely implicated, though he did not
adduce any evidence in defence.
3.3.In its judgment dated 28.09.2013, the Trial Court convicted the
appellant of the offences aforesaid with the findings that the prosecution
had been able to substantiate the charges by proving beyond doubt that
4the  appellant  kidnapped  the  victim  girl,  committed  rape  and  then
murdered her and concealed the dead body. Then, on 01.10.2013, after
having heard the accused-appellant and the prosecution on the question
of sentence, the Trial Court found no reason to take any lenient view in
the matter, particularly looking to the gruesome nature of crime and thus,
awarded varying punishments, including that of death sentence under
Section 302 IPC.
3.4.The sentence of death was submitted for confirmation to the High
Court in terms of Section 366 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19733.
On the other hand, the accused-appellant preferred an appeal against the
judgment  and  order  of  the  Trial  Court.  Both,  the  reference  case  for
confirmation of death sentence and the appeal preferred by the appellant,
were considered together and the High Court, after finding that each and
every incriminating circumstance had clearly been established, affirmed
the conviction. As regards the question of sentence, the High Court, with
reference to the nature of offence, in brutal rape and murder of a seven-
and-a-half-year-old mentally and physically challenged girl along with the
calculated attempt to cover up the crime, found the present one to be
‘rarest of rare case’ and, accordingly, confirmed the punishments awarded
to the appellant, including the sentence of death. 
3.5.In  the  present  appeals,  conviction  of  the  appellant  has  been
questioned essentially with the contentions that the investigation was not
3 ‘CrPC’, for short.
5impartial; that the trial was conducted in a hurried manner; that proper
legal aid with a counsel of sufficient experience was not provided to the
appellant; that probability of false implication cannot be ruled out since
the name of the appellant was not stated in the missing person report;
and that blood sample might not have been collected from the motorcycle
since, admittedly, it was raining heavily at the relevant time. The sentence
awarded to the appellant has also been put to the question, essentially
with  the  submissions  that awarding  of  sentence both  under IPC  and
POCSO is not sustainable; and that the Trial Court as also the High Court
have not properly examined the mitigating factors existing in favour of the
appellant,  including  the  residual  doubts  in  the  weak  chain  of
circumstances. It is also submitted that in the hurriedly conducted trial,
the appellant was unable to effectively present his case; and that the
young age of the appellant, his poor socio-economic background with
family  members  being  dependant  on  him,  and  the  likelihood  of
reformation  deserve  due  consideration  as  mitigating  factors  against
capital punishment.
3.6.Per contra , it is contended on behalf of the respondent-State that
the  evidence  of  the  witnesses  related  with  the  deceased  is  duly
corroborated by the testimony of independent witnesses; that name of the
appellant finds mentioned in the missing person report as also in the FIR;
and that the forensic and medical evidence is  consistent with the case of
the prosecution. It is also submitted that the abhorrent nature of crime
6justifies  awarding  of  death  sentence  in  the  present  case,  where  the
appellant kidnapped a minor girl who was not of sound physical and
mental health; and committed brutal rape and murder. It has also been
submitted that the subsequent conduct of the appellant in jail has been
moreover questionable and he had killed another inmate with stone for
which, he has been further convicted of the offence under Section 302/34
IPC; and this demonstrates that the appellant is a threat to the society. 
3.7.Thus, two major points would arise for determination in these
appeals;  first,  as to whether conviction  of the  appellant  calls for  any
interference; and second, if conviction is maintained, as to whether the
sentence of death awarded to the appellant deserves to be affirmed or
deserves to be substituted by any other sentence?
4.With  the  aforesaid  outline,  we  may  take  note  of  the  relevant
factual and background aspects in necessary details. 
Relevant factual and background aspects
5.The prosecution  in the present case had its foundation  in the oral
information stated in the form of complaint by PW-1 Kamla on 17.01.2013
at about 08:15 p.m. at Police Station Kankroli, District Rajsamand while
being  accompanied  by  her father PW-3  Madan  Lal. The complainant
alleged that earlier in the day, she was at her fruit-vegetable vending cart
near R. K. Hospital with her husband PW-2 Dharam Das and her father
PW-3 Madan Lal; that at around 06:30 p.m., Manoj Singh, who earlier
lived  in  the  nearby  Housing  Board  Colony,  came  to  her  cart  on  a
7motorcycle,  purchased  fruits  and  gave  chocolates  to  her  8-year-old
mentally challenged daughter K4 and left; that he returned to the cart after
about  10  minutes,  placed  her  daughter  K on  his  motorcycle  and
proceeded towards Somnath Chauraha; and that attempts were made to
chase him but he was not found. It was also stated by the complainant
that she could not note the registration number of the motorcycle but the
same  was  of  sky-blue  colour.  The  complainant  also  described  the
features and attire of her daughter and alleged that Manoj Singh had
kidnapped her daughter. 
5.1.The contents of aforesaid oral complaint were reduced in writing
(Ex. P-1) by PW-19 Nand Lal, who was the Officer-in-charge of Police
Station Kankroli at the relevant time (as the Station House Officer5 PW-20
Ganesh Nath was away) and, accordingly, FIR No. 16 of 2013 (Ex. P-2)
came to be registered for the offence under Section 363 IPC.
5.2.The said PW-19 Nand Lal immediately commenced investigation
and recorded the statements of informant Kamla as also of her father
Madan Lal; informed the SHO; transmitted messages for Nakabandi ; and
also carried out unsuccessful search at the Housing Board Colony and
other places. Thereafter, the SHO - PW-20 Ganesh Nath - took over
investigation and recorded the statement of Dharam Das, father of the
4 Having regard to the nature of case, the name of victim has been omitted in the narrations and
extractions and at all other places in this judgment; and  is substituted by the expression ‘K’. For
clarification, it may also be stated that the name of victim girl has been mentioned differently and
with alias at different places. But her identity is otherwise not in dispute and we have retained
the substituted expression ‘ K’ at every place, irrespective of any of the alternative names
appearing. 
5 ‘SHO’, for short.
8victim girl; and in view of the allegations, added the offence under Section
365 IPC. 
5.3.All  the  proceedings  aforesaid  took  place  until  midnight  of
17.01.2013. The SHO, thereafter, proceeded in search of the victim and
the offender while taking the said Madan Lal and Dharam Das with him.
Ultimately,  the  accused-appellant  was  found  at  the  Old  Bus  Stand,
Kankroli, at about 2 a.m., who divulged his name and particulars as
Manoj Pratap Singh son of Surendra Pratap Singh Rajput, resident of
Basantpur, Police Station Gugli, District Maharajganj, Uttar Pradesh. He
was  taken  to  Police  Station  Kankroli,  was  arrested,  and  his  clothes
carrying bloodstains were seized.
5.4. It has been the case of prosecution that on being questioned, the
appellant stated that he had killed the girl whom he kidnapped near R. K.
Hospital and her dead body was lying near Kamal Talai , which he could
get  recovered.  The  information  so  furnished  by  the  appellant  was
recorded (Ex. P-40); and the body of the deceased was recovered at
around 3:15 a.m. from a patari  by the bridge at Kamal Talai  as per the
disclosure of the appellant.
5.5.In view of the recovery of the dead body of K, the offence under
Section 302 IPC was added for investigation. The SHO prepared the
necessary memos and reports and sent the dead body for post-mortem
examination. In view of the post-mortem report indicating rape with the
victim, the offence under Section 376(2)(f) was also added. The SHO also
9got the accused-appellant examined in relation to the injuries on his body.
In  the  meantime,  investigation  was  transferred  to  the  Circle  Officer,
Rajsamand PW-25 Umesh Ojha. According to prosecution, the accused-
appellant divulged more information on 19.01.2013 about the location of
motorcycle used in the crime as also the place of committing the crime
and the place where clothing of the deceased was lying. This information
was reduced in writing (Ex. P-48) and in pursuance thereof, motorcycle
bearing  registration  number  RJ30  3M  5944  was  recovered;  the
bloodstains on the motorcycle were collected; the frock-like-skirt of the
deceased  was  recovered;  the  place  of  incident  was  identified;  and
bloodstained soil as also control soil were collected and sealed. Further,
the Investigating Officer got the accused-appellant medically examined for
sexual potency and his blood sample was also collected. The collected
articles/samples were sent for Forensic Science Laboratory6 examination.
The Investigating Officer further collected the certificates relating to the
date of birth of the victim as also the certificates concerning her mental
and physical disablement.
5.6.The  Investigating  Officer  also  recorded  the  statements  of
witnesses who had allegedly seen the accused-appellant taking the victim
girl on his motorcycle. Apart from other witnesses, PW-12 Ranjeet Singh,
the salesman of a liquor shop, stated that the accused-appellant came to
his  shop  at  about  6:30  p.m.  with  a  girl  sitting  on  the  motorcycle,
6 ‘FSL’, for short.
10purchased a bottle of beer and also quarrelled regarding the price. As per
the contents of charge-sheet, the Investigating Officer also found, after
carrying out background verification, that the accused-appellant had been
involved in a few other criminal cases. Significantly, it was found that the
said motorcycle bearing registration No. RJ30 3M 5944 was stolen from
Nathdwara  on 14.01.2013 for which, an FIR bearing No. 39 of 2013 had
already been registered at Police Station  Nathdwara  for offence under
Section 379 IPC.
5.7.In the post-mortem examination, the Medical Board found varying
injuries on the dead body of the victim, including those on head and on
private parts. The Medical Board opined that the cause of death was head
injury and that the deceased had been subjected to ante-mortem rape.
5.8.After  other  processes  of  investigation,  charge-sheet  was  filed
against the appellant on 02.02.2013 and the case was committed to the
Court of Sessions.  At the request of the accused-appellant, legal aid was
provided to him from the District Legal Services Authority and the Court
heard the matter for framing of charge only after appointment of a legal
aid counsel. The appellant was charged of the offences under Sections
363, 365, 376(2)(f) and 302 IPC and Section 6 POCSO.  The appellant
pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 
The Evidence
116.In trial, the prosecution examined as many as 25 witnesses and
produced 52 documents. In view of the contentions raised and issues
involved,  we  may  take  note  of  the  salient  features  of  testimonies  of
material  witness  as  also  relevant  documentary  evidence  in  requisite
details7.
7.There  had  been  several  non-official  witnesses,  including  the
parents and grandfather of the victim girl child and other persons who had
testified to the factum of kidnapping of the victim girl by the appellant and
who had also been the part of investigation proceedings. 
7.1.PW-1 Kamla, mother of the deceased-child, deposed on the basic
and primary facts of this case in her examination-in-chief as under: -
“The incident is of 17.1.2013 at 6.30 p.m. I use to place my
fruits and vegetables cart outside R.K. Hospital Rajsamand and
hence,  I  was  there.  My  father  Madan  Lal  and  my  husband
Dharamdas were also present there. At that time accused Manoj
Pratap Singh, present in Court, came to my cart to buy fruits.
Name of my daughter is  K who is 8 years old. Accused Manoj
Pratap Singh, present in the Court, gave my daughter kurkure and
chocolate on which we told him not to do so but he gave these
articles  to  my  daughter  and  left.  After  10-15  minutes  accused
Manoj  Pratap  Singh  again  came  and  took  my  daughter  on
motorcycle towards Somnath Chouraha. At that time my father
Madan Lal and husband Dharam Das followed accused but they
could not find him. Motorcycle was of sky-blue colour. I had not
seen the number of motorcycle. At that time my daughter K was
wearing a red kurta, pink colour jacket and black legging. The
colour of my daughter was fair and height 4 feet. We went to police
station. At that time my father also went along with me and we
gave a report in the police station.
7 It may be indicated that the depositions and substantial part of the relevant documents in the
original record as also the judgment of the Trial Court are in Hindi language. One set of
translations  of  the  depositions  has  been  supplied  by  the  High  Court  and  another  set  of
translations has been placed on record by the respondent-State with its reply affidavit. We have
scanned through the record with the assistance of learned counsel for the parties; and the
extracts in this judgment are with reference to the translations available on record and also, as
far as feasible, near to the meaning of the text in original.
12The report is Exhibit P-1 on which A to B are my signatures. FIR
is Exhibit P-2 on which A to B are my signatures.
Then my father and my husband went along with police to
search my daughter. I was sitting where my lorry was near R.K.
Hospital Rajsamand. In the night at 12.30 we came to know that
accused  Manoj  Pratap  Singh  had  been  found.  Then  we  were
called at the police station. Accused Manoj Pratap Singh took my
husband  and  father  to  Kamal  Talai  where  dead  body  of  my
daughter K was found. Accused Manoj Pratap Singh was residing
at Housing Board and sometimes came to us to buy vegetables;
therefore, I could identify him. Accused Manoj Pratap Singh took
my daughter and killed her.”
7.1.1.On being cross-examined, this witness stated as under: -
“At that time, accused Manoj Pratap Singh was wearing brown
coloured jacket. On that day, we lodged a missing report of K. It is
true that my daughter K was mentally retarded. It is wrong to say
that  my  daughter had  been missing once or  twice  before this
incident. It is wrong to say that my daughter used to go here and
there without informing me. I do not know where accused Manoj
Pratap Singh used to work. It is correct to say that I did not raise
any alarm when accused took my daughter because at that time
there was nobody nearby. I do not know the time of death of my
daughter. We went to the police station in the evening at 7.45 p.m.
The  accused  took away  my  daughter at  6.30 p.m.  The police
station is located at a distance of about 7 km from the place of
incident. We hired an auto to the police station and it took about
30-45 minutes. We lodged missing report of my daughter at the
police station. It is true that at the time of lodging the missing
report, we did not mention the name of accused Manoj Pratap
Singh.”
7.1.2.The  aforesaid  deposition  of  PW-1  Kamla  was  recorded  on
05.04.2013. At that point of time, clothing of the deceased had been with
the  FSL  and  the  same  were  received  later  in  the  Trial  Court.  The
prosecution, after completion of other evidence, moved an application
under Section 311 CrPC for further examination of this witness PW-1
Kamla, for the purpose of identification of the clothes of deceased. This
application was duly contested by the learned counsel for the accused-
appellant with the submissions that such recalling of the witness would be
13allowing the prosecution to fill up the lacunae in its case. However, the
Trial Court, by its considered order dated 26.08.2013, accepted the said
application looking to its purpose and while indicating that the accused
would  nevertheless  have  the  opportunity  of  cross-examination.  This
witness PW-1 Kamla was, accordingly, again examined on 04.09.2013
where  she  stated  about  the  attire  of  her  daughter  when  she  was
kidnapped by the accused-appellant and duly identified Article No. 1,
being the leggy (lower) as also Article No. 7, being the kurta (frock) of her
daughter K. 
7.2.PW-2 Dharam Das, father of the deceased girl, corroborated the
testimony of PW-1 Kamla and stated that the appellant came and took
their daughter. He also stated that he was present when the appellant
was  arrested  from  Kankroli  Bus  Stand,  when  the  appellant  made  a
disclosure statement at the police station, and when the body of his
daughter was recovered at the instance of the appellant. This witness
also  testified  to  various  proceedings  of  recoveries  and  seizures  and
identified his signatures on various memos like that of site inspection,
arrest of the appellant, recovery of the dead body, its panchayatnama  etc.
This witness further testified that his daughter was 8 years of age and
was  mentally  retarded;  and  exhibited  the  relevant  documents  in  that
regard, being Ex. P-11 to P-14. This witness was also thoroughly cross-
examined where he stated, inter alia, as under: -
“I am hawker of fruits and vegetables. On the day of incident, I
was at the cart. That time I was selling vegetables to customers.
14That time accused Manoj Pratap Singh was the customer who
bought fruits and went. It is wrong that thereafter accused Manoj
Pratap  did  not  come  to  the  cart.  That  time  it  was  drizzling,
therefore none else was there. It is wrong that there were some
more carts near my carts; other carts were away from my cart. I do
not know the names of other cart owners. There is a milkman’s
shop, which is away from my lorry. There are some carts of snacks
but due to cold weather and rain fall, there was no cart. We were
about to go home after some time, but accused Manoj Pratap
Singh abducted and took away my daughter. He lured by giving
chocolate to my daughter. It is wrong that I do not know accused
Manoj Pratap Singh. He used to come to my cart. It is wrong that
my daughter went with accused with her consent, but she was
abducted by accused Manoj Pratap Singh. It is true that  K went
with the accused Manoj Pratap Singh on being lured by chocolate.
I stopped my daughter but as she was feebleminded and so, did
not stop. It is true that at the time the accused abducted and took
away my daughter, nobody was there. That time accused Manoj
Pratap Singh was wearing check shirt and jacket. My daughter
was not wearing any footwear. On 17.1.2013 at night signature
was taken on memo Ex. P-3. Then said, signature was taken on
another  day. While signature  was taken nobody was with  me.
Then said, my father-in-law was also with me. My signature was
taken on Ext. P-3 at police station. Then said signature was taken
at Kamal Talai. Signature was taken at different times which I do
not remember. The police officials did not read over and explain
what was written on the document. Then said that they read over
and explained the contents but do not remember the same today. I
am illiterate, I can only sign therefore, I do not know the contents
of memo Ex. P-4. It is wrong that when we went to the police
station,  accused  Manoj  Pratap  Singh  was  sitting  in  the  police
station. I had said that he was sitting at bus stand. Accused Manoj
Pratap Singh was arrested on the same night. It is wrong that
police officials did not seize clothes in front of me. The same were
seized in the night of 17.1.2013. I do not know what was written on
jacket of accused Manoj Pratap Singh. My daughter's dead body
was found  at Taledi Kamal  Talai.  Dead body  was lying  at  the
bridge. Bruises were found on head and all other parts of body of
my daughter. It is wrong that injuries were not found on the legs. It
is wrong that police official took my signature on memo at police
station. Signature was taken at different places such as police
station and house. It is true that Ex. P-12 was released after the
incident. It is true that certificate Ex. P-14 was also released after
the incident.”
7.3.Father of the informant, PW-3 Madan Lal, also corroborated the
testimony of PW-1 Kamla and PW-2 Dharam Das as regards kidnapping
15of the victim girl by the appellant, arrest of the appellant, his disclosure
statement at the police station, and the subsequent recovery of the body
of  the  victim  girl  at  the  instance  of  the  appellant.  He  also  deposed
regarding the memos of arrest, seizure, recoveries, and panchayatnama ,
and identified his signatures on the memos Ex. P-5 to Ex. P-8.  We may
usefully extract the relevant part of statement made by this witness in his
cross-examination as follows: -
“…..At about 6:30 p.m., I reached the place of incident and
stood there. Accused Manoj Pratap Singh came to buy vegetables
just after me and thereafter some more customers came. About 15
feet away from my son-in-law's cart, there were some more carts.
Saras Milk Diary and Ayurvedic medicine shop is also there. Due
to rainfall and storm, there was nobody. That time accused Manoj
Pratap Singh bought fruits and vegetable, gave chocolate to the
baby girl and went. Then after 10-15 minutes he came back at
6:30 p.m. and immediately took the child on his motorcycle and
went away. Since the child was feebleminded, she used to sit with
anybody. We were attending the customers. It is wrong that I have
not  seen  the  accused  abducting  the  child  and  the  customers
informed about the abduction. Somnath Choraha is approximately
3-4 km away from the place of incident. Baby girl's dead body was
found at Kamal Talai bridge. I do not know about the direction of
Kamal Talai from the place of incident. I could not see the accused
Manoj Pratap Singh. Then we went to the police post. We went to
Bandiyabada police post where missing report was lodged that the
accused Manoj Pratap Singh took away the child. Because we
knew the name of Manoj Pratap Singh, we gave his name in the
report. I do not know the name of father of accused Manoj Pratap
Singh. We went to search accused Manoj Pratap Singh because
the child was with him. We reached police station at about 7:00-
8:00 p.m. Two police Jeeps came out of the police station, one
moved towards R. K. Hospital and another moved towards bus
stand. In one of the Jeep, my daughter Kamla and some police
officials went towards R. K. Hospital. In another Jeep, Dharam
Das, some of the police officials went towards bus stand. I was
sitting  on  the  motorcycle  of  my  colleague  Manilal.  Then  we
searched Dhoinda and various other places in jeep but we were
unable to find anyone, so we returned to the police station and in
second round, we went towards bus stand. In the first instance we
went to Dhoinda via R K; it is wrong that we went via Kamal Talai
road, instead we went via bypass. We met accused Manoj Pratap
16Singh present in the court when we went to bus stand in the
second round. Accused Manoj Pratap Singh was wearing jacket
and jeans and at that time it was raining lightly. Accused Manoj
Pratap Singh was standing near the water kiosk. Nobody was near
him. Firstly, the police saw the accused Manoj Pratap Singh with
bloodstains  on  his  clothes.….Accused  Manoj  was  brought  to
police station in jeep and upon enquiry he disclosed that the child
had been left at Kamal Talai bridge. On one side of Kamal Talai
bridge there was a house whose name I do not remember and on
the other side was a cremation ground. Ex. P-3 Site Plan of the
place of incident  was prepared at 7:00 a.m.  At Kamal Talai, I
signed at two or three places… It is true that, I have not seen
anyone killing my granddaughter K.”
7.4.PW-5  Maniraj  Singh  has  been  an  independent  witness  to  the
kidnapping of the victim girl, as also to the  inquest report . He stated in his
examination-in-chief  all  the  essential  facts  in  corroboration  of  the
statements above-noted. He also testified to the inquest report, seizure
memo and other memos concerning delivery of dead body, site plan of
Kamal  Talai  and  site  plan  of  the  place  of  kidnapping.  In  his  cross-
examination, this witness stated, inter alia, as under: -
“….The place of Incident is 200 to 300 feet away from my office.
On the day of incident other carts were open. I do not remember
the name of carts which were open. I know deceased  K. It is
wrong that I did not see K when she was abducted. That time we
did not know that accused Manoj Pratap Singh is abducting the
child; therefore we did not prevent him from doing so. It is wrong
that K willingly sat on the motorcycle of the accused, instead the
accused  caught  her  and  made  her  sit  in  front  seat  of  his
motorcycle. I did not know that accused is abducting the child;
therefore I did not stop him. It is correct that at that time other
persons were also standing at the fruit cart. It is correct that other
persons who were standing at the fruit cart did not stop him. It is
possible that in my police statement, I have stated that the colour
of the motorcycle was sky blue but in my statement the colour of
the motorcycle has been written as green. It is correct that I am off
duty at 5:00 p.m. It is true that I have motorcycle, and I am using it
to go to my office. It is correct that at that time I did not try to follow
accused Manoj Pratap Singh because my motorcycle was parked
at some distance. I do not know about employment of accused
Manoj Pratap Singh. I know accused Manoj Pratap Singh as I
17used to see him at that place for past two to four months. I do not
have any special identification of accused Manoj Pratap Singh. It
is wrong that someone dictated me the name of accused Manoj
Pratap Singh. The place of Incident is opposite to the place from
where the dead body of K was recovered. Accused Manoj Pratap
Singh took away K towards Somnath Choraha which is in another
direction. There were injuries on right eye below eyebrows and
behind the head above the neck of the deceased K…. It is wrong
that my signature was taken on all the memos at the same time.
Then said whatever memos were prepared were signed by him
after reading. I do not remember the colour of the clothes that the
accused Manoj Pratap Singh was wearing at the time of incident.”
7.5.PW-17 Dinesh Bhatia had been another witness to the kidnapping
of the deceased. He is brother of PW-2 Dharam Das, and has a tea stall
behind the cart of PW-1 Kamla. He too corroborated the testimonies of
PW-1 Kamla, PW-2 Dharam Das, PW-3 Madan Lal and PW-5 Maniraj
Singh. 
7.6.One more  independent  witness,  in  regard to the  fact  that the
deceased girl was last seen with the appellant, had been PW-12 Ranjeet
Singh.  He  was  the  salesman  at  a  liquor  shop,  where  the  appellant
stopped to purchase beer immediately after taking the victim girl on his
motorcycle.  This  witness  stated  in  his  examination-in-chief  that  the
appellant  came  to  his  shop  with  an  eight-year-old  girl  sitting  on  his
motorcycle, purchased a bottle of beer, and even quarrelled as regards
the price. The relevant portion of this testimony would read as under: -
“I work as a salesman at Salampura Wine Shop. This shop is
owned  by  Bansi  Lal  Mewada,  resident  of  Sardargarh.  On
17.01.2013, at 6.30 p.m. in the evening, I was at the liquor shop.
At that time, the accused Manoj Pratap Singh, who is present in
the court, came on motorcycle. A girl of about eight years was
sitting in front of his motorcycle. The accused Manoj Pratap Singh
came to the liquor shop and he asked for a bottle of beer. I gave
him a bottle of beer and asked for eighty rupees. He was having
18shortage  of twenty rupees.  He  quarrelled and  fought  with me.
Then he gave twenty rupees, took the bottle of beer and went
away on motorcycle. At that time the child was sitting with him on
the motorcycle. Next day I came to know that accused Manoj
Pratap Singh raped and killed the child.”
7.6.1.In his cross-examination, this witness PW-12 Ranjeet Singh stated
as under: -
“Police came to my shop on 18th and made enquiries. On the
same day, they took my statement. I work alone on the Salampura
Wine Shop. At first he did not gave twenty rupees but thereafter he
gave it. The fact of giving twenty rupees has not been written in
the  police  statement.  It  was  a  sky-blue  coloured  passion
motorcycle.  I  do  not  know  the  registration  number  of  the
motorcycle.  I  do  not  remember  the  colour  of  the  clothes  that
accused Manoj Pratap Singh, who is present in the court, was
wearing on that day. Accused Manoj Pratap Singh, who is present
in the court, went towards Housing Board on his motorcycle. I did
not see accused Manoj Pratap Singh raping or killing the child. I
heard about it on the next day.”
7.7.PW-6 Khemchand, who is the brother of Dharam Das, identified
his signatures on panchayatnama  (Ex. P-8), site plans (Ex. P-3 and Ex.
P-4), memo of seizure of clothes (Ex. P-9), and memo of handing over
the dead body to Dharam Das (Ex. P-10). PW-4 Narendra Singh was also
a witness to panchayatmana  and he too identified his signatures. PW-7
Kuldeep Singh and PW-8 Ajay Singh had been the witnesses to various
proceedings in the investigation including seizure of the motorcycle (Ex.
P-15), collection of blood samples from the tank, pedal and cylinder of the
motorcycle (Ex. P-16); recovery of the frock of the deceased which was
smeared  with  blood  (Ex.  P-17);  collection  of  soil  sample  carrying
bloodstains (Ex. P-18); preparation of site plan of the place of occurrence
and memo of inspection (Ex. P-20 and Ex. P-21); and memos of further
19inspection of the motorcycle and the place of occurrence (Ex. P-22 and
Ex.  P-23).  They  duly  testified  to  the  proceedings  conducted  in  their
presence and to their signatures on the relevant memos. 
8.The medical, scientific and other cognate evidence in this matter
could be broadly divided into four parts: first being the post-mortem report
of the dead body of victim girl and depositions of the members of Medical
Board  who  carried  out  post-mortem;  second  being  the  evidence
concerning medical examination of the accused-appellant; third being the
evidence concerning age and disabilities of the victim girl; and fourth
being the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory, particularly on DNA
matching.
8.1.In the post-mortem report (Ex. P-35), the nature and extent of the
injuries on the dead body of the victim came to be stated, inter alia, in the
following terms: -
“*** *** ***
II CRANIUM & SPINAL CORD
Note:  - The  Spinal  canal  need  not  be  examined  unless  any
indication of disease or injury exists.
1. Scalp, Skull and vertebrae 2. Membranes 3. Brain and Spinal
Cord
(1) Lacerated wound of 5 X 1cm in between 2 eyebrows.
(2) There was # (fracture) of frontal bone below the wound.
(3) Hematoma on occipital region of 5 X 5 cm.
(4)  Multiple  haemorrhages  large  in  size  (extra  &  subdural)  in
frontal temporoparietal & Occipital regions)
*** *** ***
11. Organs generation: External and Internal
(1) Hymen completely torned.
(2) Vagina torned upto unijunction of lower 2/3rd & upper 1/3rd
posteriorly & laterally on both side.
(3) II° Perineal tear.
(4) Vault was intact.
20(5)  Blood  showing  on  external  genital  regions  &  on  medial  &
anterior sides of thighs.
*** *** ***
EXTERNAL INJURIES UNDER HEADING I
1) Multiple abrasions & bruises on forehead.
2) Lacerated wound of 5x1cm in between both eyebrows.
3) Hematoma in preauricular area of 10x8cm right side.
4) Bruises all around the left ear and on pinna.
5) Bruise of 5x3 cm below left mandible & below lower lip of 2x1
cm.
6) Multiple abrasions on both cheeks.
7) Multiple abrasions on both sides & front of neck.
8) Multiple abrasions & bruises on front, back top of shoulders of
both sides.
9) Multiple abrasions on front & back chest, specially on prominent
bony areas.
10) Multiple abrasions on supra pubic region extruding up to both
iliac fossa.
11) Multiple abrasions on upper anterior and lateral parts of both
thighs.
12) Abrasions of 7x5 cm on lateral side of right knee joint.
13) Multiple abrasions on & around left knee joint.”
8.2.The  members  of  Medical  Board  comprising  of  three  medical
officers pointed out in the post-mortem report that all the injuries were
fresh and of the duration within 16-18 hours of examination. They stated
their remarks in the following terms: -
“REMARKS BY MEDICAL OFFICER
In the opinion of Medical Board, cause of death is Head injury.
Ante mortem rape done.”
8.3. PW-14 Dr. Manju Purohit, who was working as Gynaecologist, R.
K. Hospital, Rajsamand at the relevant time and was a member of the
Medical Board, testified to the aforesaid post-mortem report and to the
steps taken by the Medical Board in collecting, sealing and delivering
various samples/swabs. This witness was not only cross-examined on
behalf of the accused-appellant, but was also posed questions by the
21Court  and  was  cross-examined  yet  further. The  relevant  part  of  her
testimony in cross-examinations and Court questioning could be usefully
extracted as under: -
“Generally, after six hours of death, rigor mortis starts in a body
but it also depends upon the weather condition. It is wrong to say
that contraction was found in the body. All the external injuries
mentioned in Ex. P-35 post-mortem report cannot be sustained
together by falling from motorcycle. Injuries below neck, jaw and
vagina cannot be sustained after falling from a motorcycle. It is
wrong to say that the injuries could be sustained due to dupatta
stuck on the neck. It is correct that at the time of examination,
human semen was not found on her body. It is correct that human
semen was also not found on the outer surface of vagina. It is
correct that on Ex. P-36 the certificate and post-mortem report
number is blank.
QUESTION BY COURT: -
Q. What is your expert medical opinion after conducting external
and internal examination of the injuries on the body and after
analysing the entire circumstances and condition of the body?
A. In my expert opinion, the eight year old innocent girl had been
brutally and inhumanly raped and on objecting, the person who
raped her behaved in an inhuman and cruel manner as a result of
which, she sustained different simple and grievous injuries due to
which she died. Laceration of the vagina of the deceased shows
that she was brutally raped in an inhuman manner.
CROSS EXAMINATION: - ADVOCATE FOR THE ACCUSED
SHRI B.K. BAIRWA.
The cause of death was injury caused on the head”
8.4.PW-15 Dr. Kailash Chand as also PW-21 Dr. Chetna Vaishnav
had been the other members of the Medical Board that carried out post-
mortem examination and they corroborated the testimony of PW-14 on all
the material particulars. PW-21 Dr. Chetna Vaishnav, also stated in her
examination-in-chief that after examination, the Medical Board was of the
opinion that ‘ the deceased was subjected to brutal rape and her death
22was caused ’. This witness further testified to the physical examination of
the accused-appellant after his arrest, when she found abrasions on his
right knee and made such an entry on the application of the Investigating
Officer  (Ex.  P-41).  The  relevant  parts  of  her  testimony  in  cross-
examination would read as under: -
“…. It is wrong that the entire injury on the body of the deceased
can occur after falling from motorcycle. It is correct that traces of
sperm were not found on the body of the deceased but we took
the samples from vagina of the deceased for examination of this
fact..…It is wrong that all the injuries on the body of the deceased
were  self-caused  but  some  of the injuries on  the body of the
deceased may be self-caused. It is correct that in Ex. P 35, from X
to Y, it has not been mentioned in the opinion regarding death that
which of the specific injury sustained on which part of the head
resulted in death but in the opinion of medical board, multiple
injuries were found on the head of the deceased which collectively
resulted  in  death  of  the  deceased.  The  said  injuries  can  be
sustained by blunt weapon or by ramming the head on stone. It is
correct that in this context, there is no opinion of the medical board
available on Ex. P35 post-mortem report. Signature of PMO is
from G to H on Ex. P-41 and, date is of 20.01.2013 and time is
11:40  a.m.  It  is  wrong  that  Ex  P-41  Letter  was  given  on
20.01.2013. I had examined the accused on 19.01.2013 at 12:00
p.m. It seems that PMO has mistakenly mentioned the date on Ex.
P-41 from G to H. It is wrong that Ex. P-41 was given on 20th….” 
8.5.As regards the medical procedures conducted on the question of
sexual capability of the appellant and collection of his blood sample, PW-
22 Dr. Satish Singhal, the Medical Officer, R. K. Hospital, Rajsamand
testified to his report (Ex. P-43) to the effect that there was nothing to
suggest that the appellant was not capable of doing sexual intercourse.
This witness also testified to the factum of collection of blood sample of
the appellant after his consent (Ex. P-44) and to the forwarding letter for
the Chief Chemical Examiner of the Forensic Science Laboratory (Ex. P-
2345). Nothing substantial is available in his cross-examination except that
the details of procedure carried out by him were not mentioned in Ex. P-
43. 
8.6.As regards age of the deceased and her mental and physical
disabilities, the prosecution led documentary evidence in support, being
the Medical Board’s Certificate dated 04.03.2010 on permanent disability
(Ex. P-11), where it was noted that the deceased K suffered from spastic
palsy with 70% permanent disability; Progress Report (Ex. P-13) issued
by Jagriti Vidyalaya, a special school for children with mental disabilities,
along with a Certificate (Ex. P-12) issued by the same school, which
stated  that  the  child  had  an  IQ  of  50%.  Another  Certificate  from
Government Primary School, Gadriyawas Dhoinda (Ex. P-14) was also
produced. The said Certificates (Exs. P-12 to P-14) gave her date of birth
as 09.07.2005. PW-18 Dr. Narendra Paliwal proved the said Certificate
Ex. P-11. The relevant part of his deposition in the cross-examination
would read as under: -
“It  is  correct  that  in  Ex.P-11  certificate,  the  age  of  K is  not
mentioned and identification mark is also not mentioned.….It is
correct  that  in  Ex.  P-11,  neither  there  is  signature  nor  thumb
impression of  K.….It is correct that in issuance of this certificate
there  was  no  neurologist  in  the  board.  I  had  issued  the  said
certificate  for  physical  disability  and  not  for  any  neurological
examination.  It  is  correct  that  the  said  certificate  is  related  to
orthopaedics. It is wrong to say that the muscles could tear in this
disease.”
8.7.It  is  also  noticed  that  by  way  of  a  communication  dated
22.01.2013 (Ex.- 52), the later Investigating Officer PW-25 Umesh Ojha
24sought medical opinion/comments regarding the nature of disablement of
deceased K with reference to the said certificate dated 04.03.2010 (Ex. P-
11)  whereupon,  the  Medical  Officer  made  his  endorsement  in  the
following words: -
“As per the certificate issued, her cordination movements of limbs
which are controlled by brain were disturbed and as such she was
physically and mentally challenged child.”
8.8.We may also usefully extract the relevant parts of the report of
DNA examination carried out by the State Forensic Science Laboratory,
Rajasthan, Jaipur (that was drawn on 08.04.2013 and came to be marked
as Ex. P-51), which would read as under: -
“DNA was  extracted  from  all  the  samples  except  exhibit  No.7
(Control swab), 9 (Blood smeared soil) and 10 (Control Soil). DNA
profiles were prepared by using Microsatellite loci of AmpFISTR®
Identifiler®  Plus.  Data  was  analysed  by  GeneMapper  ID-X®
Software. Blood samples were consumed during examination.
RESULT OF EXAMINATION
(1). Same Female DNA profile was obtained from the Exhibit No. 1
(Coat), 2 (Pant), 3 (Shirt), 5 (Pajami), 6 (Blood from Motor Cycle),
8 (Frock), 12 (Vaginal Swab), 13 (Vaginal Smear) and Exhibit No.
14 (Blood sample of K).
2. Male DNA profile was obtained from Exhibit No. 4 (underwear)
which is matching with the DNA profile of Exhibit No. 11 (Blood
sample of Manoj Pratap Singh)
CONCLUSION
The DNA test performed on the exhibits is sufficient to conclude
that the DNA profile obtained from Exhibit No.1 (Coat), 2 (Pant), 3
(Shirt),  5  (Pajami),  6  (Blood  from  Motor  Cycle),  8  (Frock),  12
(Vagina Swab),  13 (Vaginal  Smear)  is  matching  with  the  DNA
profile of Exhibit No. 14 (Blood sample of K).”
9.The evidence of a few official witnesses related with the process
of investigation may also be noticed in requisite details. 
259.1.PW-19 Nand Lal was the second in command at Police Station,
Kankroli at the relevant time. This witness testified to the facts about
lodging of report and handing over investigation to PW-20 SHO upon his
arrival at the police station. He identified the signatures of PW-1 Kamla
and PW-3 Madan Lal as also his own signature on the report Ex. P-1 and
the FIR Ex. P-2.
9.2.The testimony of PW-20 Ganesh Nath, SHO is pertinent since the
appellant was arrested by him; the first disclosure statement was made
by the appellant to him; and the initial processes related with investigation
were carried out by him. The relevant extracts of his examination-in-chief,
particularly those relating to the arrest and medical examination of the
appellant as also of discoveries on the information of the appellant, would
read as under: -
“….I started the search proceedings alongwith grandfather and
father and brought Manoj Pratap Singh from Kankaroli bus stand
to the police station and after making necessary enquiry, arrested
him vide Ex. P-5 …..At the time when Manoj Pratap Singh was
arrested, he was wearing coat, jeans, shirt and underwear among
which, bloodstains were found on his coat, Jeans and underwear,
which were seized vide memo Ex. P-6. Then they were sealed and
stamped…...
In custody, accused Manoj Pratap Singh voluntarily disclosed
on 18.01.2013 at 2:30 a.m. to me, the SHO, that he could get
recovered the dead body of the girl whom he abducted from R.K.
Hospital, Rajsamand, killed her and disposed her body at Kamal
Talai. The said information was written according to the statement
of the accused and the memo has been marked as Ex. P-40 on
which signature of accused Manoj Pratap Singh is from A to B who
was read over and explained the contents of memo marked as Ex.
P-40 who understood the contents and imposed his signature from
A to B and my signature is from C to D. After writing the said
information,  we  went  to  the  place  in  government  vehicle  as
disclosed by accused Manoj Pratap Singh alongwith witnesses
Madan Lal and Dharam Raj who were present there. He asked us
26to stop and get down from the vehicle at the place where Kamal
Talai Road meets at 50 feet road. He got down from the vehicle
and walking ahead, pointed towards dead body of a girl on the
railing of a bridge and said that  this is the girl whom he had
abducted. Dharam Raj who was also accompanying saw the body
and exclaimed that she is her daughter  K. Since it was dark, I
inspected the body in torch light and found that the girl was dead.
There was black colour underwear on her body and rest of the
body was completely nude. Multiple abrasions were present on the
body of the girl and there was injury on her eye. Since it was night,
I  prepared  memo  of  recovery  Ex.  P-7  on  which  signature  of
accused Manoj Pratap Singh is from E to F, signature of witness
Dharam Raj is from A to B, signature of witness Madan Lal is from
C to D and my signature is from G to H…..Thereafter, at dawn,
Panchayatnama of girl K was prepared after calling the attesting
witnesses wherein all the particulars and the injuries present on
the  entire  body  were  mentioned; the same were read  over  to
Panchas who, after looking at all the circumstances, opined that
the death of the girl K was the result of injuries caused to her body.
Memo of Panchayatnama of the body is Ex. P-8….. Thereafter, the
dead body was seized and kept in the mortuary of R.K. Hospital,
Rajsamand and report was sent to the board for post-mortem.
Post-mortem  was  conducted  by  medical  board  and  after  post-
mortem black coloured lower (pajami) which the girl was wearing
at the time of incident and on which bloodstains were found, was
seized, kept in a bag, sealed, stamped and marked as Ex. P-9….
…..In custody, I got the injuries on the body of accused Manoj
Pratap Singh examined for which, I gave the requisition to the
medical officer of R.K. Hospital, Rajsamand, the copy of which is
Ex. P-41 on which, my signature is from A to B. Thereupon, the
accused was physically examined by Dr. Chetna, who recorded
the  description  of  injuries  on  Ex.  P-41  which  is  C  to  D  and
signature of doctor is from E to F. Thereafter, following the order of
the higher officials, the investigation was handed over to the circle
officer Shri Umesh Ojha…..”
9.2.1.The relevant portion of the cross-examination of PW-20 Ganesh
Nath could also be usefully reproduced as under: -
“It is wrong that on the same day Kamla handed over a missing
report to Nand Lalji. It is correct that I was not present when Kamla
came to the police station. My staffs, Dharam Raj and Madan Lal
were  accompanying  me  when  search  proceedings  were
conducted. When I received the information at 8:20 p.m., I was
with my staffs. Thereafter, I came to the police station and went in
search alongwith Dharam Raj and Madan Lal. I came back to the
police  station  after  2-3  hours  and  went  in  search  alongwith
Dharam Raj and Madan Lal. Accused Manoj Pratap Singh was
27arrested by me. I caught accused Manoj Pratap Singh from old
bus stand at Kankaroli, took him to the police station and after
making enquiries, I arrested him. I prepared the arrest memo after
arresting the accused at the police station, therefore, in Ex. P-5
the place of arrest is blank but at the top the place of arrest has
been mentioned as Kankaroli police station. It is correct that I
seized  the  clothes  of  the  accused  Manoj  Pratap  Singh  and
thereafter provided him other clothes to wear. I cannot say as to
whether  at  that  time  accused  Manoj  Pratap  Singh  was  under
influence of any intoxicant but he has not consumed liquor and he
did not appear to be under influence of the same…. After receiving
information under section 27, I went to the place of incident where
accused Manoj Pratap Singh got down from the vehicle and he
was walking in front of us. There was a house in front of the place
where dead body of K was found and remaining areas were plots
and agricultural lands. It is correct that the dead body was found at
Kamal Talai road where 50 feet road meets. It is correct that I did
not enquire the people of the said house or people near that house
because further investigation was done Deputy Sir. Statement of
accused Manoj Pratap Singh under Section 27 was written word
by  word.  It  is  correct  that  accused  Manoj  Pratap  Singh  is
educated. Accused has stated that he is educated till class 10. It is
correct that it was dark when the body of K was recovered. It was
3:00 a.m. …..It is correct that at the time of arrest, there was injury
on the knee of accused Manoj Pratap Singh. It is correct that there
was no injury on the face and chest of accused Manoj Pratap
Singh….It is wrong that I have arrested any wrong person or there
was any pressure on me.”
9.2.2.The disclosure statement made by the appellant to PW-20 SHO
on 18.01.2013 has been marked as Ex. P-40, and its contents would read
as under: -
“I have murdered the girl whom I had kidnapped from R.K.
Hospital. Her dead-body is lying towards Kamal Talai, which I can
get recovered.”
9.3.The testimony of PW-25 Umesh Ojha, who was the Circle Officer,
Rajsamand and who carried out the later part of investigation in this case
is  equally  pertinent.  The  appellant  allegedly  disclosed  the  place  of
incident,  the  location  of  motorcycle  and  the  location  of  frock  to  this
witness,  who  carried  out  the  necessary  seizures  and  follow-up
28proceedings.  This  Investigating  Officer  also  collected  other  evidence
concerning the appellant, including his sexual capability test report and
his antecedents. The relevant extracts of his testimony would read as
under8: -
“…..On  19.01.2013  accused  Manoj  Pratap  Singh  present  in
court today voluntarily informed me that he could show the place
where motorcycle which was used in the incident had been left, he
can accompany us to the place and the nearby places where he
raped the deceased and where her blood soaked kurta had been
left. The said information Ex. P-48 was recorded word by word as
stated by the accused and thereafter read over to him…. As per
the  information  obtained,  we  went  to  the  place  of  incident  for
investigation  and  recovery  alongwith  the  summoned  witnessed
Kuldeep Singh and Ajay Singh and accused Manoj Pratap Singh.
As per the information of accused Manoj Pratap Singh we reached
near canal ahead of cremation ground on the way to Dhoinda from
50 feet road where the accused Manoj Pratap Singh asked us to
stop; hence we stopped the vehicle and got down. Then accused
Manoj Pratap Singh pointed towards east and said that it was the
place where he raped the deceased and left the motorcycle. ….
250 meters away from where we got down, accused Manoj Pratap
Singh…  who  was  walking in front  of us,  stopped and pointed
towards  the  place  where  he  left  the  motorcycle.  We  saw  the
motorcycle  lying  near  the  bundle  of  sticks.  The  side  of  the
motorcycle where there is silencer was touching the ground, head
light of motorcycle was towards wall of field, motorcycle was blood
smeared and its number was RJ 30 3M 5944. Accused Manoj
Pratap Singh stated that on this very motorcycle he brought the
girl  here.  The  said  motorcycle  was  used  in  the  incident  and
therefore, it was seized and memo prepared which is Ex. P-15…
Motorcycle’s right side back indicator was broken and hanging;
and its petrol tank, silencer, engine body, and rim of backside tyre
were smeared with blood. Since it was not possible to send the
motorcycle  to  FSL  for  examination  of  the  bloodstains  on  it,
specimen sample of blood was taken on gauze of white cloth and
control sample was also taken; and they were placed in separate
plastic containers and were sealed. The sample was marked D
and control was marked D 1 for which a separate memo was
prepared which is Ex. P-16.…
8 It may be indicated that this witness PW-25 also asserted about the appellant having made
other disclosures like the place where he smashed the head of the victim girl on hard gravelly
surface (stone) upon her resistance; and having smashed her forehead between silencer and
engine of motorcycle etc. These parts of his testimony as also other parts of formal nature have
been omitted from extraction.   
29Thereafter  accused  Manoj  Pratap  Singh…  walked
approximately  3  metres  from  where  motorcycle  was  lying  and
indicated by his hand and said that there is frock-type skirt, which
the deceased girl was wearing; on a close look, the skirt was of
red colour with light yellow dots; the skirt was torn and there was
blood on its lower side..…
…Thereafter…Manoj Pratap Singh…walked to another side of
way approximately 2.5 metres, showed by hand, and said that at
this place I raped the deceased girl, That place was looking hard
on which scratch marks and bloodstains were there. In presence
of  witnesses,  blood  sample  and  control  sample  were  taken
separately for test by FSL…
*** *** ***
During  investigation  I  wrote  a  letter  to  Medical  Officer  R.K.
Hospital about DNA test and sexual capability test of accused
Manoj Pratap Singh which is Exhibit P–42 on which G to H is my
signature.  On this medical officer gave the sexual capability report
Exhibit P– 43; carbon copy of identity and consent form is Exhibit
P–44 and carbon copy of forwarding the blood sample for DNA
test is Exhibit P–45…
*** *** ***
During investigation I had obtained the disability certification of
K by the Board of Doctors, which is Exhibit P–11 on which I to J is
my endorsement and K to L is my signature. I also obtained the
mental retardation certificate of deceased  K from Shri Dwarkesh
Aksham Seva Sansthan which is Exhibit P–12 on which C to D is
my endorsement, E to F is my signature and A to B signature of
the grandfather of the deceased Madan and G to H is signature of
Principal Jagriti Special School, Kankroli. The progress report of
Jagriti Special School, Kakroli is Exhibit P–13 on which C to D is
my endorsement and E to F is my signature. The certificate of date
of  birth  and  school  entrance  form  of  Govt.  Primary  School,
Gadriyawas is Exhibit P–14 on which C to D is my endorsement
and E to F is my signature, G to H is signature and seal of the
Principal Govt. Primary School, Gadriyawas Dohinda…
*** *** ***
…  The  First  Information  Report  registered  at  Police  Station
Nathdwara regarding theft of the motorcycle number RJ 30 3M
5944, used by the accused Manoj Pratap Singh in the present
incident, is Exhibit P-46, carrying my endorsement at C to D and
my signature at E to F.
A written requisition sent to the SHO, P.S. Shambhupra District
Chittorgarh  for  obtaining  the  previous  conviction  record  of  the
accused Manoj Pratap Singh and his report is Exhibit P-47 on
which G to H is my endorsement and I to J is my signature. Along
with this letter, the SHO P.S. Shambhupra District Chittorgarh had
forwarded  the  true  copy  of  FIR  No.  69/11  registered  against
accused Manoj Pratap Singh with the charge-sheet, which was
taken  on  the  file.  Similarly, FIR  No.  428/12  and  charge-sheet
30therein against the accused Manoj Pratap Singh at P.S. Rajnagar,
District Rajsamand was taken on record. The copies of FIR and
charge-sheet  in  case  Nos.  79/12  and  78/12  registered  at  P.S.
Kankroli, District Rajsamand were also taken on record…”
9.3.1. We may also usefully extract the relevant parts of the statement
made by this witness in cross-examination as under: - 
“It is true that from where motorcycle was seized was an open
area. It is also true that from where deceased's frock was seized
was an open area. It is wrong that cremation ground was near the
place of incident but was far away from there. It is wrong that
public movement is there at the place of incident. 50 feet road is
far away from the place of incident. It is wrong that near canal
public  way  is  situated  rather,  trails  type  way  is  available  for
movement towards fields. It is true that information provided by the
accused under section 27 which is Ex. P-48 was written by me. It
is true that accused Manoj Pratap is educated. The accused Manoj
Pratap Singh was only signed on Ex. P-48. It is wrong that houses
are constructed nearby the place of incident. Fields being situated
near the place of incident and nobody being there, the information
about fields was obtained from the area patvari and the owners
were  asked  about  the  incident  but  they  did  not  have  any
information and therefore their statement not recorded….It is true
that there was one house near the place where the victim’s dead
body was lying, which was a little away. It is true that the person
who  was  residing  in  that  house  had  no  knowledge  about  the
incident that took place in the night and therefore, his statement
was not recorded. It is true that the bridge where the victim’s dead
body was found might be of public movement, but as the incident
happened during night therefore, there would have been no public
movement at that time….. I can't say that there had been rainfall at
the time of incident. I can't say that there had been rainfall on
second  day  of  incident….It  is  true  that  information  related  to
incident as given by the accused was recorded word to word. It is
wrong that at that time accused told that he is innocent. It is wrong
that seized article were safely not sent to the FSL for test. It is true
that no criminal case was lodged against the accused at Police
Station  Gugali,  District  Maharajganj,  (Uttar  Pradesh)  which  is
endorsed on the back of memo Ex. P-31. It is wrong that I was
under pressure and carried out wrong investigation. It is wrong
that there had been demonstrations in the city when the accused
was  not  found;  rather,  after  his  arrest  there  had  been
demonstrations against him. It is wrong that I investigated the case
only on the basis of circumstantial evidence, rather investigated
with recording of the statements of independent witnesses present
at the time of kidnapping. It is true that no one had seen the
accused raping and killing the deceased.”
319.3.2.The disclosure statement made by the accused-appellant to PW-
25 on 19.01.2013 has been marked as Ex. P-48 and its contents would
read as under: -
“I can show the place where the motorcycle used by me at the
time  of  incident  is  lying  and  the  nearby  place  where  blood
smeared  kurta of the deceased is lying and the place where I
committed rape on her, which is also nearby.”
9.4.PW-23  Ramdev  Regar,  Sub-Inspector  of  Police,  deposed
regarding  the  fact  that  a  report  about  theft  of  motorcycle  bearing
registration No. RJ30 3M 5944 was lodged at Police Station Nathdwara
on 14.01.2013. This witness stated as under: -
“On 14.01.2013,  I was posted as Sub Inspector at Nathdwara
Police Station. On that day complainant Ramesh Chand son of
Purushottam, resident of Sundercha presented a written report
that Hero Honda Passion Plus motorcycle of his master Girishji
Garg, bearing registration No. RJ 30 3AM 5994 was parked near
Naniji ka Bag, Nathdwara, which had been stolen by an unknown
person. On the basis of the said report, Case No 39/13 under
Section 379 IPC was registered and investigation was handed
over to ASI Peshawar Khan. On the basis of the said report, I
registered the FIR, the certified photocopy whereof is 46 and my
signature is from A to B.”
9.4.1.This witness PW-23 deposed in his cross-examination as under: -
“In this matter, I have not seized the said motorcycle. It is correct
that in the instant matter, I have not obtained the RC or other
documents of the motorcycle.”
9.5.There had been other official witnesses who carried out different
tasks in the aid of investigation, like PW-10, PW-11, PW-13, PW-16; and
another  official  witness  PW-24,  who  filed  the  charge-sheet.  Their
evidence, essentially of formal nature, need not be dilated upon.
3210.The appellant in his statement under Section 313 CrPC stated that
he had been falsely implicated in the case. The appellant, however, did
not lead any evidence in his defence.
The  Trial  Court  found  the  appellant  guilty  and  awarded  death
sentence
11.The Trial Court, in its judgment of conviction dated 28.09.2013,
accepted the prosecution case and, while rejecting the contentions urged
in defence, held that the chain of circumstances was duly established by
the prosecution, bringing home the guilt of the accused-appellant. 
Deceased aged 7 ½ years, mentally and physically challenged
12.The Trial Court, in the first place, took up for consideration the
questions relating to the age and alleged disablement of the deceased.
The Trial Court held, with reference to the Medical Board’s Certificate on
Permanent Disability dated 04.03.2010 (Ex. P-11) and the statement of
PW-18  Dr.  Narendra  Paliwal,  that  the  deceased  was  suffering  from
spastic  palsy  because  of  which,  the  aggregate  percentage  of  her
permanent disability was 70%. The doctor also specified that the medical
condition  of  the  deceased  girl  was  due  to  imbalance  between  the
movements of limbs and brain. The Court also referred to the statements
of PW-1 Kamla, PW-2 Dharam Das, PW-3 Madan Lal, PW-17 Dinesh
Bhatia  and  PW-5  Maniraj  Singh,  who  testified  to  the  fact  that  the
deceased was a mentally and physically challenged child. In fact, in the
Certificate dated 20.01.2013 issued by the Jagriti Vidyalaya, a special
33school for children with disabilities (Ex. P-12), it was also stated that the
deceased was a mentally retarded child with 50% IQ.
12.1.As regards the age, with reference to the aforesaid Certificate (Ex.
P-12) as also the Progress Report of the same school for the session
2009-10 (Ex. P-13) and the Certificate from the Government Primary
School, Gardiyawas Dohinda (Ex. P-14), the Trial Court found that the
date of birth of the deceased  K  was 09.07.2005 and hence, she was
about 7½ years of age on the date of incident, i.e., 17.01.2013. The Trial
Court also observed that the witnesses stated her age at 8 years only in
their approximation. 
12.2.Thus, the Trial Court concluded that the deceased was 7½ years
of age at the time of incident and she was suffering from 70% physical
disablement and was also mentally retarded.
Deceased last seen with the appellant
13.The Trial Court, thereafter, took up for consideration the question
of kidnapping of the deceased girl and referred to the testimony of PW-1
Kamla, PW-2 Dharam Das, PW-3 Madan Lal, PW-17 Dinesh Bhatia as
also that of PW-12 Ranjeet Singh and PW-5 Maniraj and held proved the
facts  that  the  appellant  kidnapped  the  deceased  from  the  lawful
guardianship of her parents with intent to secretly and wrongly confine
her; and that the deceased was last seen with the appellant.
Discoveries on the information of appellant
3414.Moving on with the chain of circumstances, the Trial Court referred
to the facts emanating from the statements of PW-2 Dharam Das and
PW-3 Madan Lal that: a) the appellant was found at about 2:00 a.m. at
the bus stand with bloodstained clothes; b) the appellant disclosed that
the dead body of the victim was lying at Kamal Talai ; and c) the appellant
got recovered the dead body at Kamal Talai . The Trial Court also referred
to the testimony of PW-20 Ganesh Nath as regards arrest of the appellant
and the disclosure statement made by him (Ex. P-40) whereupon the
dead body was recovered at  Kamal Talai . Thus, the Trial Court held
proved the basic facts that the appellant was arrested after about 7½
hours of his kidnapping the victim girl; the clothes worn by him were
bloodstained, which were seized and sealed; and after about 1½ hours of
his arrest, the dead body of the victim girl was recovered at the disclosure
and information of the appellant. 
15.The Trial Court also found proved the factum of other recoveries at
the instance of the appellant like that of motorcycle used by him and the
frock  worn  by  the  deceased,  as  duly  established  by  the  oral  and
documentary evidence adduced by the prosecution. It was also observed
by the Trial Court that the place of recoveries was such that it was only
within the knowledge of the appellant. 
Medical evidence 
16.As regards the questions of rape and murder of the victim girl, the
Trial Court made an elaborate reference to the post-mortem report (Ex. P-
3535) and the depositions of  PW-14  Dr. Manju Purohit  and  PW-21  Dr.
Chetna Vaishnav, particularly concerning the nature of injuries and the
expert opinion on the manner of causing them and,  inter alia, found as
under: -
“…as per her expert opinion, forcible rape has been committed on
8 year old innocent girl in extremely cruel and heinous manner and
on resisting the rape, she was treated with extreme cruelty and
mercilessly due to which, several simple and grave injuries were
caused on the person of deceased and she died due to such
injuries.  The  witness  has  also  expressed  that  vagina  of  the
deceased was ruptured leading to the conclusion that rape was
committed on her in a beastly and merciless manner. The said
statements of witnesses were confirmed by post-mortem report
(Exhibit – P35) prepared by the Medical Board.”
Report of FSL
17.The Trial  Court also referred to the  other  evidence  on record
establishing the collection of samples and proper forwarding of the same
to  the  FSL.  The  Trial  Court  further  referred  to  the  linking  evidence,
including the additional statement of PW-1 Kamla, as regards the clothing
of her deceased daughter. Thereafter, the Trial Court referred to the FSL
report (Ex. P-51) wherein it was found that the DNA profile of blood
collected from the person and clothing of the deceased matched with the
DNA profile of blood found on the coat, pant and shirt of the appellant as
also  that  found  on  the  motorcycle.  The  facts  established  by  this
substantial piece of evidence and the conclusions deducible therefrom
were found by the Trial Court as follows: -
“Thus from the said D.N.A. test, the D.N.A. profile obtained from
the coat (Exhibit No.1), pant (Exhibit No.2) and shirt (Exhibit No.3)
and  from  the  Pajami  of  the  prosecutrix  (Exhibit  No.5),  blood
sample taken from the motorcycle of the accused (Exhibit No.6),
36frock  of  the  prosecutrix  (Exhibit  No.8),  vaginal  swab  of  the
prosecutrix (Exhibit No.12) and vaginal smear (Exhibit No.13) are
matching with D.N.A. profile of blood sample obtained from the
prosecutrix (Exhibit No.14). Meaning thereby, blood found on coat,
pant and shirt worn by the accused at the time of incident, which
were seized at the time of arrest and that found on the motorcycle
used by the accused at  the time of incident,  is matching with
D.N.A. profile of blood sample of the prosecutrix. From this cogent
circumstantial evidence, the only conclusion is that with intention
to  secretly  and  wrongfully  confine  the  prosecutrix,  only  the
accused kidnapped her and took her to a secluded place and
committed rape on her and murdered her by causing injuries.”
(emphasis supplied)
Defence contentions rejected
18.The assertion of the appellant that he was falsely implicated in the
matter was not accepted by the Trial Court, since he did neither provide
any reason for his false implication nor made any such suggestion to the
prosecution witnesses. The Trial Court also dealt with every submission
made on behalf of the appellant by the defence counsel and rejected the
same, as noticed infra. 
18.1.It was contended that as per PW-1 Kamla, she had not stated the
name of appellant at the time of giving the initial report. With reference to
the timing of report as also the statement of PW-3 Madan Lal, the Trial
Court found that such a contention was totally baseless and a particular
line  in  the  statement  of  PW-1  Kamla  occurred  only  because  of  her
ignorance about the meaning of words. It was also found that in the report
(Ex.  P-1),  the  particulars  were  clearly  stated  that  the  appellant  was
previously known to them. Another contention that the parents and other
relatives of the deceased did not raise alarm at the time of kidnapping of
the girl was also found baseless with reference to the facts of the case
37and the statement of PW-1 Kamla. Even this was argued that the FIR was
lodged after some delay but the Court found, with reference to the time of
kidnapping and the distance of police station, that there was no such
delay in lodging the FIR. It was further argued that there was discrepancy
in the colour of motorcycle as stated by PW-1 Kamla (sky-blue colour)
and as stated by PW-17 Dinesh Bhatia (green colour). The Court found
that the recovered motorcycle was green in colour and bloodstains of
deceased were found on the same. Thus, such discrepancy of colour was
of no effect. Another contention was that the place of arrest was not
stated in Ex. P-5. The Trial Court found that the place of arrest was
mentioned as Police Station Kankroli and it was not of any effect on the
substance of the prosecution case. Similarly, the attempts on the part of
the  defence  to  suggest  some  minor  contradictions,  about  how  many
persons were available at the time of kidnapping of the child or whether
she  was  wearing  slippers  or  not  and  the  contention  that  the  main
witnesses were all interested persons, were rejected by the Trial Court,
being of no substance. Further, the questions sought to be raised about
the presence of witnesses of seizure and recovery etc. were also found
baseless and were rejected. An argument was also raised that the place
of recovery of the dead body, i.e.,  Kamal Talai , was on the public way
where anybody could leave the dead body. The Trial Court rejected this
contention  too,  with  reference  to  the  fact  that  immediately  after  the
incident, the dead body was recovered at the instance of the appellant
38and he had failed to show any other reason of his knowledge about the
location of dead body. It was also argued that the house of one Manoj
was shown near the place of incident but he was not examined and that
the registration certificate of the motorcycle was also not produced. The
Trial Court found that the Manoj was not even remotely related with the
matter nor was the owner of the motorcycle. It was also observed that, in
any  case,  such  minor  shortcomings  in  the  investigation  were  of  no
assistance  to  the  accused.  It  was  further  argued  on  behalf  of  the
appellant  that  PW-12  Ranjeet  Singh  had  not  stated  the  registration
number of the motorcycle; that according to PW-1 Kamla, she came to
know at about 12:30 in the night that the appellant was found but the time
of arrest was shown at 2:00 a.m.; that no other injury except one on knee
was found on the body of the appellant; that the blood group was not
established; and that PW-25 Umesh Ojha stated the colour of the skirt of
deceased as red with yellow dots but PW-1 Kamla stated that the dots
were of white colour. All these hair-splitting arguments were noticed and
rejected by the Trial  Court for being of no substance and having no
material  bearing  on  the  cogent  and  convincing  evidence  led  by  the
prosecution. Even the admissibility of FSL report was also questioned but
this contention was rejected by the Trial Court with reference to Section
293 CrPC. 
18.2.The aforementioned consideration of the contentions urged on
behalf of the appellant by the Trial Court is to indicate the nature of
39extensive arguments advanced on behalf of the accused-appellant in the
Trial Court. As shall be noticed hereafter later, this feature coupled with in-
depth cross-examination of each and every prosecution witness, is of
material bearing on one of the contentions urged before us about want of
proper legal assistance to the appellant in the Trial Court.
Chain of circumstances complete
19.Since there were no witnesses to the crime of rape and murder
and it had been a case of circumstantial evidence, after the above-noted
discussion, the Trial Court held that prosecution had been successful in
establishing the  chain  of circumstances  linking the appellant with  the
crime in such a manner that no other conclusion except that of his guilt
was possible. The Court held, inter alia, as under: -
“On  the  basis  of  aforesaid  discussion  and  analysis,  the
prosecution has been fully successful in proving beyond doubt that
near  about  6.30  p.m.  on  17.01.2013,  the  accused  with
premeditated  criminal  mentality  kidnapped,  with  intention  to
secretly  and  wrongfully  confine  the  7½  years  old  70  per  cent
mentally disabled, innocent, helpless, meek handicapped daughter
of complainant Kamla, by making her to sit on motorcycle in broad
day light in presence of her parents, grandfather and uncle, taking
unfair advantage of her natural abnormality, physical and mental
disability and by tempting her with food stuff, from Housing Board
within jurisdiction of Police Station Kankroli, District- Rajsamand;
and took her to a lonely place near crematorium on 50 feet road
towards  Dhoinda,  in  Kankroli  with  premeditated  intention  of
committing rape on her kidnapped her; and thereafter, in order to
enhance his beastliness and inhumanity, he consumed beer and
then in a brutal manner, while scratching the body of an innocent
girl child, crossed the height of ignobility by committing rape on her
in  extremely  heinous  manner;  and  murdered  here  by  causing
multiple  simple  and  grave  injuries  on  her  body  in  extremely
barbaric manner. Moreover , it is also proved that  the accused
committed the offence of aggravated penetrative sexual assault by
causing  grievous  hurt  and  bodily  harm  to  the  deceased  while
committing penetrative sexual assault. 
40Therefore,  after  aforesaid  entire  discussion,  the  prosecution
has been found successful in proving the offence charged against
accused Manoj Pratap Singh under Sections 363, 365, 376(2)(f),
302 I.P.C. and under Section 6 Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012, beyond reasonable doubt. Hence, accused
Manoj  Pratap  Singh  is  liable  to  be  convicted  for  the  offence
punishable  under  Sections  363,  365,  376(2)(f),  302  I.P.C.  and
under Section 6 Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
2012.” 
(emphasis supplied)
20.Thus, in the overall appreciation of the evidence on record and the
surrounding factors, the Trial Court was satisfied that the prosecution had
successfully  substantiated  its  case  beyond  reasonable  doubt  and
accordingly, convicted the appellant of offences under Sections 363, 365,
376(2)(f),  302  IPC  and  Section  6  POCSO  by  its  judgment  dated
28.09.2013. 
Death sentence by the Trial Court
21.After having recorded the conviction as aforesaid, the Trial Court
took up the matter three clear days later, i.e., on 01.10.2013 and heard
the  arguments  on  the  question  of  sentencing.  The  burning  question
before the Trial Court was about the punishment to be awarded for the
major offences of rape and murder of a seven-and-a-half-year-old girl
child. 
21.1.Having  heard  learned  Public  Prosecutor  for  the  State  as also
learned  amicus curiae  for the accused-appellant, the Trial Court took
note of the principles enunciated in various decisions of this Court; and
examined  the aggravating factors on record, particularly those relating to
the gruesome nature of the crime as also the mitigating factors projected
41on behalf of the accused-appellant that it was his first offence; that he was
28  years  of  age;  that  he  was  a  married  person  with  an  8-year-old
daughter; and that his family including old parents was dependant on him.
Having examined all the relevant facts and factors, the Trial Court formed
the opinion that a lenient view could not be taken looking to the nature of
the crime; and, taking the case in ‘rarest of rare’ category, found it just
and appropriate to award death sentence for the offence under Section
302 IPC. The Trial Court also awarded other punishments, as noticed
hereinbefore. 
21.2.A few of the relevant observations of the Trial Court with reference
to the decisions of this Court and in its appreciation of aggravating and
mitigating circumstances before forming the opinion in favour of awarding
death sentence could be usefully extracted as under: -
“It is true that in homicidal offence, life sentence is a rule and
death sentence is an exception. Death sentence must be imposed
only  when  life  imprisonment  appears  to  be  an  altogether
inadequate  punishment  having  regard  to  the  relevant
circumstances of the crime. This point should also be considered
whether there is anything abnormal to award death sentence in
the offence for which life sentence could be awarded? Even after
considering all the important circumstances favouring an accused,
the circumstances of the offence should be such that there be no
option but to award death sentence. Death sentence should not be
awarded  except  in  the  most  serious  criminal  cases.  Before
choosing the substitute of death sentence, the circumstances of
offence and accused should be taken into consideration. When
any helpless, innocent girl is murdered and the accused is in a
position to dominate her, then it will be proper to award him death
sentence. A Judge should prudently and carefully determine the
proportional and justified punishment for the accomplishment of
the objectives as per the sentencing provided by law for serious
offences. If, without any provocation and with cool mind, a girl is
kidnapped,  raped and brutally murdered and the murder is so
heinous which not only hurts judicial sensitivity but also shocks the
42pure conscience of society, death sentence will be the only justice
in such a case.
*** *** ***
As it has been mentioned earlier that prosecution has clearly
proved against the accused with direct & circumstantial, cogent,
conclusive, incontrovertible evidence that on 17.01.2013 at about
6:30 p.m., accused Manoj Pratap Singh son of Surendra Pratap
Singh, caste Rajput, aged 28 years, resident of Basantpur, Police
Station Gugli, District Maharajganj (Uttar Pradesh) kidnapped a
7½  year old 70% physically disabled, retarded, helpless, weak girl
from the custody of her parents without their permission in broad
day-light  and  committed  rape  on  her  in a  brutal  manner  after
taking  her  to  a  lonely  place.  During  commission  of  rape,  the
accused caused multiple simple & grave injuries on the body of
that  helpless  innocent  girl  in  a  cruel  manner.  The  injuries
mentioned  in  the  oral  evidence  of  Medical  Jurist  and  in  post-
mortem report (Exhibit P-35) were found on the body of deceased.
Multiple abrasions, contusions and wounds were found on the
head, ears, jaw, cheeks, around neck, both the shoulders, chest,
back,  around  frontal  part  below  umbilicus,  thighs  &  knees  of
deceased. Hymen of vagina of deceased was found to be having
recent signs of ruptures; 2/3rd lower part of vagina of deceased
and posterior and lateral side were found completely torn; the
outer  skin  in  between  vagina  and  anus  of  the  deceased  was
completely torn; and blood clots were found all around the vagina.
On  internal  examination  of  deceased,  multiple  fractures  were
found on her frontal occipital and tempo parietal regions due to the
injuries inflicted on head. In reply to the questions asked by the
Court,  the  Medical  Jurist  Dr.  Manju  Purohit  (PW-14)  has
expressed her expert opinion as under: -
"As per my expert opinion, forcible, brutal and heinous
rape was committed with an 8 year old innocent girl and
the  deceased  resisted  the  rape  and  whosoever
committed rape on her, had behaved in extremely brutal
and heinous manner because of which various simple
and serious injuries were inflicted on the body of the
deceased and she succumbed to the injuries found on
her body. The vagina of deceased having been found in
torn  condition,  the  only  inference  is  rape  had  been
committed on her in heinous and brutal manner".
No  evidence  is  available  on  record  in  support  of  the
arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  accused.  Even  if  these
statements  of  accused  are  taken  to  be  true  for  the  sake  of
arguments that he is married and father of 8 year old daughter and
he is the only son of his old parents, then too, on the basis of such
circumstances  he  does  not  deserve  lenient  view  or  sympathy.
Rather in the case in hand, no such circumstances are present in
favour of the accused on the basis of which it would be justified to
43have sympathy or leniency for him while passing order of sentence
for the commission of the charged offence.
In  the  aforesaid  facts  and  circumstances,  in  my  humble
opinion, the accused committed rape on deceased heinously and
brutally at a lonely place after kidnapping her intentionally with
cool  mind  without  any  provocation.  Thereafter,  in  the  same
sequence, the deceased has been brutally murdered by causing
injuries on her body in a very inhumane, merciless and heinous
manner. The  act  of  accused  against  humanity  falls  within  the
purview of the rarest of the rare case for being lowest, extreme,
most brutal, merciless and heinous murder case for which, it is
obligatory to punish the accused with death sentence for securing
justice.”
High Court confirmed the death sentence awarded to the appellant
22.As noticed, this case came  up before the  High  Court on  two
counts,  viz.,  the  death  sentence  submitted  for  confirmation  and  the
appeal against conviction and sentence preferred by the appellant. The
High  Court  reappreciated  the  material  placed  on  record  and,  in  its
common judgment and order dated 29.05.2015, upheld the decision of
the Trial Court in convicting the appellant of the aforementioned offences
and sentencing him to death for the offence under Section 302 IPC.
23.The High Court examined the statement of PW-1 Kamla, which
had been corroborated by PW-2 Dharam Das, PW-3 Madan Lal and PW-
5 Maniraj Singh, to note that the appellant came to the fruit and vegetable
stand  and  took  the  deceased  on  his  motorcycle  towards  Somnath
Chauraha; and that despite people in the locality chasing the motorcycle,
the appellant could not be located.
23.1.The High Court found that PW-6 Khem Chand had duly proved
Ex. P-3 (memo of inspection of place of incident and site map) and Ex. P-
8 (panchayatnama  of the dead body of the deceased); and that he had
44accompanied PW-2 and PW-3 when body of the deceased was recovered
pursuant to the disclosure statement of the appellant, who led them to the
location of the body. The factum of recovery of the motorcycle used by the
appellant and other articles was also found proved by the statements of
PW-7 Kuldeep Singh and PW-8 Ajay Singh.
23.2.The High Court laid emphasis on the statements of PW-14 Dr.
Manju  Purohit,  PW-15  Dr.  Kailash  Chand  and  PW-21  Dr.  Chetna
Vaishnav as also on the post-mortem report (Ex. P-35) to find that the
deceased had been subjected to great cruelty at the time of commission
of the crimes of rape and murder. The High Court, thereafter, examined
the FSL’s report on DNA Examination (Ex. P-51) to find that the samples
of  blood  on  the  articles  recovered  from  the  appellant  matched  the
samples of the blood taken from the deceased. The findings of the High
Court in this regard could be reproduced as under: -
 “The D.N.A. Report which is Ex.P. 51 on the record, shows that
the same D.N.A. of female profile, namely of the deceased was
obtained from Ex.1 coat, Ex.2 pant, Ex.3 shirt, Ex.4 underwear.
Also to be noted is the statement of the investigating officer that
when the accused was apprehended he had bloodstains on his
clothing  and  the  same  were  sent  for  DNA  examination.  The
matching  of  the  blood  group  gains  signification  in  such  a
circumstance.  The incriminating articles, namely, the clothes and
the blood group matching is an important circumstance showing
complicity of the appellant in the crime in question. ”
(emphasis supplied)
24.Having thus examined and analysed the evidence on record, the
High Court found that the prosecution had been successful in establishing
the chain of circumstances conclusively linking the appellant with the
45crime, while ruling out any other hypothesis. The High Court summed up
its findings and conclusion as follows: -
“21. Taking all the evidence into account, we are of the opinion
that the circumstances which have been clearly established are:
that  the  appellant  was  seen  taking  the  deceased  on  his
motorcycle; that the appellant had led to discovery of the dead
body of the deceased, the place where he kept his motorcycle
which had bloodstains of the deceased on it; at his instance the
stone smeared with blood was recovered9; that the medical report
clearly indicates about the injuries sustained by the deceased on
her body; that the injuries sustained on the private parts have
been stated by the doctor to have been caused by forcible sexual
intercourse; that the chemical analysis report links the accused
with the crime; that the appellant has not offered any explanation
with regard to the recovery made at his instance; other than a bald
statement  that  he  was  not  guilty,  the  accused  has  not  any
evidence either to discredit the prosecution witness or to establish
his innocence: and that nothing has been stated in his examination
under Section 313 Cr.P.C that there was any justifiable reason to
implicate him in the crime in question. Thus, we find that each of
the incriminating circumstances has been clearly established and
the chain of events are conclusive in nature to exclude any other
kind of hypothesis, but the one proposed to be proved, and lead to
a  definite  conclusion  that  the  crime  was  committed  by  the
accused. 
22. Therefore, finding no infirmity in the judgment under challenge,
we  affirm  the  judgment  given  by  the  learned  trial  Judge  and
dismiss the appeal filed by the accused Manoj Pratap Singh.
(emphasis supplied)
25.Having affirmed the conviction of the appellant, the High Court
proceeded to consider the question as to whether the death sentence
awarded to the appellant required any interference. 
25.1.It was sought to be argued on behalf of the appellant before the
High Court that the case did not fall under the rarest of rare category; that
9 The High Court appears to have gathered an impression that some ‘stone’ was recovered at
the instance of the appellant with reference to the memo dated 21.01.2013 (Ex. P-23) and
statements of PW-7 Kuldeep Singh and PW-8 Ajay Singh as also PW-25 Umesh Ojha, where
they indicated that the accused-appellant had shown the place of incident and hard gravelly
surface with stone whereupon did he smash the head of the victim while committing rape. It
does not appear that any ‘stone’ was as such recovered and seized. However, this aspect is not
of material bearing on the substance of the matter.
46the mitigating circumstances operating in favour of the appellant should
be considered; and that a lenient view ought to be taken with regard to
sentencing, since he was 28 years of age at the time of commission of
the crime and had a family comprising of a minor daughter, his wife and
his father dependent on him.
25.2.The High Court took note of various leading decisions wherein this
Court  has  enunciated  the  principles  to  be  applied  in  the  matters  of
sentencing, particularly relating to the offences where death sentence
could also be awarded.  The High Court took note of the facts of the
present case involving the heinous crime of brutal rape and murder of a
young girl, who was below 8 years of age and was suffering from physical
and mental disabilities. The High Court also observed that there was no
element of compassion on the part of the appellant, who brutally raped
the child and smashed her head; and that the conduct of the appellant
with brutal nature of the offence did not call for any leniency. The High
Court  further  took  note  of  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
accused-appellant about his being a young person and having a family to
support but observed that these were not the mitigating circumstances in
this case which gives repulsions to the conscience of the Court and the
community. Hence, the High Court found that the present case was falling
in the category of rarest of rare and proceeded to confirm the death
sentence awarded to the appellant while observing as under: -
“32. In the case in hand, there are no aggravating circumstances
(sic)  or  mitigating  circumstances  put  forth  to  award  a  lesser
47punishment than what has been awarded by the Sessions Court.
The accused after giving a chocolate to a young girl aged 8 years,
who not only was having permanent disability of 70% but also
having  I.Q.  of  50%,  abducted  her  and  took  her  away  on  a
motorcycle. Thereafter, he committed a heinous crime of not only
brutally raping her, but also hit her head against the silencer of the
motorcycle  as  well  as  with  her  stone  causing  her  death.  It  is
evident  from  the  statement  made  by  the  doctor  who  had
conducted the postmortem that the young deceased tried to resist
the rape but there was no compassion shown at all.  The plea
raised  by  the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  accused  that
leniency should be shown since the accused was a young man
with a family, cannot be said to be a mitigating circumstance at all.
The accused after brutally raping her, hit her head against the
motorcycle and then used a stone to smash her head and tried to
flee that very night itself. The heinous offence of brutal rape on a
helpless  young  girl  followed  by  a  cold-blooded  murder  and
calculated  attempt  to  cover-up  the  said  incident  shocks  and
repulses the conscience of this Court and the community.  Placing
reliance upon the settled principles as enumerated by the Apex
Court in several judgments, this Court has no hesitation in holding
that this case falls within the category of rarest of rare cases and
upholds  the  judgment  passed  by  the  Sessions  Court.  In  our
opinion, the judgment passed by the Sessions Court suffers from
no error.”
33. Therefore, the D. B. Criminal Murder Reference No.3/2013
preferred  by  the  State  of  Rajasthan  is  allowed  affirming  the
judgment and order passed by the learned Sessions Judge dated
28.9.2013.  The  death  sentence  awarded  is  confirmed.  D.  B.
Criminal Jail Appeal No. 854/2013 filed by the accused appellant
Manoj Pratap Singh is hereby dismissed.
(emphasis supplied)
Rival Submissions
26.Assailing the judgment and order aforesaid, Mr. A. Sirajudeen,
learned senior counsel  for the appellant has put forward a variety of
submissions while questioning the process of investigation as also the
manner of conducting the trial; and has asserted that the appellant was
denied a proper and adequate opportunity to defend himself. Learned
counsel  has  also  endeavoured  to  find  faults  or  shortcomings  in  the
evidence adduced by the prosecution; the main plank of submissions had
48been that the prosecution case is based on a weak chain of circumstantial
evidence and the appellant is entitled to the benefit of ‘residual doubt’.
The learned counsel has also questioned the sentence awarded to the
appellant with the submissions that in view of several mitigating factors, it
would not be justified to punish him with death.
26.1.Learned senior counsel for the appellant has strenuously argued
that the investigation in this case had not been impartial and has raised
questions over investigation with the submissions that after finding the
appellant at the bus stand, the police along with the father of deceased
(PW-2), took him directly to the  police station , recorded his confession
and thereafter took him to the spot where the body of deceased was
found, instead of enquiring from him the whereabouts of the deceased.
Further,  the  unusual  collecting  of  evidence  against  the  appellant  in
relation to other cases and overt reliance on personal opinion of doctors
about  the  manner  of  commission  of  offence,  establishes  that  the
investigation was not impartial, where final report was submitted within 12
days of the appellant’s arrest, even before receiving the DNA report.
26.2.Learned senior counsel has further contended that the trial was
conducted in a hurried manner, where reasonable time to prepare for
facing charges was not afforded to the appellant and at least two months’
time should have been given for the purpose of perusal of final report. It
has also been contended that the appellant was not given the opportunity
to  meet  his  family  members  after  arrest  nor  was  he  given  proper
49opportunity to engage a counsel of his choice, thereby depriving him of
his constitutional right guaranteed under Article 22(1) of the Constitution
of India. According to the learned counsel, an inexperienced counsel was
appointed in legal aid, who failed to have any meeting or discussion with
appellant in prison in order to formulate a better version of his defence in
trial; and the manner of cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses
shows the absence of preparation of the counsel and his inexperience in
conducting the defence.
26.3.While assailing the findings against the appellant on the basis of
the chain of circumstances, the learned senior counsel has referred to
certain  aspects, which according  to him, show  the  shortcomings  and
lacunae  in the prosecution case. In  this regard, learned counsel  has
submitted that the name of appellant was not mentioned in the missing
person report initially filed in this matter, as admitted by PW-1 and PW-3,
though the appellant was known to the family of the victim; and the said
initial missing person report is not on record. These factors, according to
the learned counsel, give rise to the possibility of the appellant being not
the culprit. The learned counsel has further submitted that the doctors
PW-14, PW-15 and PW-21 unjustifiably used the expressions “brutal” and
“inhuman” in their statements though they were only expected to depose
about the nature of injuries found on the body and the weapon/object
likely to have caused said injuries. According to the learned counsel,
absence of semen on the body of the victim as also in the vaginal swab
50operate  against  the  theory  of  rape  in  this  case.  Yet  further, learned
counsel has submitted that as per the account given by a number of
witnesses including eye-witnesses, there was rain, drizzling and storm at
the time of occurrence and the motorcycle used for kidnapping was kept
in open space. In such a situation, even the possibility of bloodstains
remaining on the metal surface of motorcycle is rare. Learned counsel for
the appellant has further argued that there is nothing on record to show
that the girl was mentally retarded; that the witnesses have only deposed
that she was feeble minded and even the certificate issued from school to
prove her mental caliber cannot be relied upon because the person who
issued such certificate was never examined. 
26.3.1.According  to the  learned  senior counsel  for the appellant, the
aforesaid factors individually and cumulatively lead to the position that the
present one is a case of weak chain of circumstances and conviction of
the appellant remains unsustainable. 
26.4.Again, with reference to the nature of evidence adduced in this
matter and asserting it to be a case of weak chain of circumstances, the
learned senior counsel has strenuously argued that in any case and at
any rate, residual doubt remains about involvement of the appellant in
commission of the crime and he is entitled to the benefit thereof.
26.4.1.In  this  line  of  submissions,  learned  senior  counsel  for  the
appellant has also endeavoured to argue that the injuries found on the
body of the deceased were only bruises and abrasions, apart from the
51injury on the head; and in the context of the deposition of PW-21 that the
death might have been caused as a result of rape, it could be deduced
that causing of death was not the intention of the appellant. According to
the learned counsel, only the knowledge of consequence of act may be
attributed but residual doubt does exist about absolute certainty of the
intention to commit the offence in a brutal manner.
26.5.Learned  counsel  has  also  submitted  that  the  accused  of  an
offence of rape cannot be convicted under both POCSO and IPC as per
Section 42 of POCSO. It can only be under any one of the enactments
that  Court  could  impose  maximum  punishment  provided  therein  and
hence, life sentence awarded by the Trial Court for the offence under
Section 376 IPC as also under Section 6 POCSO is unsustainable in law. 
27.As regards the question of sentence, learned senior counsel for
the appellant has contended that even when the charge is proved beyond
reasonable  doubt  but  is  based  on  certain  circumstances  rather  than
absolute proof, the benefit of residual doubt ought to be given to the
accused and capital sentence should not be awarded. According to the
learned counsel, even if this case at all warrants conviction, it doesn’t
warrant the punishment of death because it may be a rare case but, is not
rarest of rare. 
27.1.Learned senior counsel for the appellant, while adverting to the
mitigating factors, has submitted that there is nothing on record to show
that the appellant has become a menace to the society or cannot be
52reformed. It has also been highlighted that the appellant was only about
28 years of age when the FIR was registered against him; that he comes
from a poor economic background; and that he has a family with wife, 8-
year-old daughter and 70-year-old father to look after. With reference to
these factors and the overall circumstances, learned counsel would argue
that the appellant does not deserve death and the sentence as awarded
in this matter deserves to be commuted to that of imprisonment for life.
27.2.Learned senior counsel for the appellant, in support of his plea
against the death sentence, has referred to several decisions of this Court
wherein  death  sentence  was  altered/commuted  to  other  sentence,
including those in Viran Gyanlal Rajput v. State of Maharashtra : (2019)
2 SCC 311; Babasaheb Maruti Kamble v. State of Maharashtra : (2019)
13 SCC 640 ;  Nand Kishore v. State of Madhya Pradesh : (2019) 16
SCC  278;  and  Central  Bureau  of  Investigation  v.  Sakru  Mahagu
Binjewar & Ors. : (2019) 20 SCC 102 .
28.Per contra,  Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing
for the respondent-State has duly opposed the submissions made on
behalf of the appellant with reference to the evidence on record and the
findings recorded by the Trial Court and the High Court. 
28.1.Learned senior counsel for the respondent-State has contended
that the investigation has been carried out in the present matter with due
attention to necessary details; and there had not been any shortcoming
affecting  the  substance  of  the  case.  In  relation  to  the  questions  of
53procedural  safeguards  in  the  trial  and  opportunity  to  the  accused-
appellant  to  defend  himself,  learned  counsel  for  the  respondent  has
submitted that the appellant never asked for a counsel of his choice and it
was through the legal aid that a defence counsel was appointed, who
possessed sufficient experience of about 9 years. Moreover, the counsel
so appointed made qualitative efforts to conduct the trial and examination
of witnesses with best of his ability, who rather deserves admiration for
the efforts made by him. Hence, it cannot be said that the accused-
appellant was deprived of proper legal assistance and proper opportunity
to defend himself.
28.2.Learned senior counsel for the respondent would submit that the
evidence  adduced by mother, father  and maternal  grandfather  of  the
deceased  (PW-1,  PW-2  and  PW-3  respectively),  is  creditworthy  and
unimpeachable;  and  the  same  is duly  corroborated  by  PW-5 Maniraj
Singh,  PW-12  Ranjeet  Singh  and  PW-17  Dinesh  Bhatia,  who  were
independent witnesses of the relevant facts, particularly those relating to
the kidnapping of the victim girl from the vending cart of her parents.
Thus, according to the learned counsel, the fact that the deceased was
last seen with the appellant is established beyond any doubt. In relation to
the  argument  that  the  name  of  appellant  was  not  mentioned  in  the
missing person report, learned counsel for the respondent would submit
that this contention is not correct inasmuch as the name of the appellant
was indeed mentioned in the missing report (Ex. P-1) lodged by PW-1 at
548:15 p.m., though it was mentioned as “Manoj Singh” instead of “Manoj
Pratap Singh”; and the FIR (Ex. P-2), which was registered on the basis
of the said report also carries the name of appellant. Learned counsel for
the  respondent  would  further  submit  that  by  way  of  the  documents
available on record, i.e., Exs. P-11, P-12 and P-13 and the evidence of
PW-18 Dr. Narendra Paliwal , it is proved beyond doubt that the deceased
was  a  mentally  and  physically  disadvantaged  child,  who  was  also
suffering from spastic palsy, i.e., uncontrolled movement of muscles and
joints.
28.3.Learned senior counsel for the respondent-State has referred to
the extensive injuries pointed out in the  post-mortem  report (Ex. P-35)
and has submitted that such injuries prove beyond any doubt that the
deceased was subjected to brutal rape and was murdered mercilessly, as
noticeable from the injuries on the occipital and parietal region of the
head of the deceased and as concluded by the doctors of Medical Board
that the she died due to the injuries on her head. Learned counsel has
also strongly relied upon the FSL’s report on DNA Examination (Ex. P-51)
to submit that the matching of DNA profile of the blood sample taken from
the body of the deceased with that of the blood samples taken from
clothing of the appellant as also with the blood samples taken from the
motorcycle used in the crime, is a rather clinching piece of evidence that
leaves nothing to doubt that the brutal rape and murder of the deceased
could only be attributed to the appellant.
5529.Learned senior counsel for respondent has further submitted that
there was no infraction of the requirements of Section 235(2) CrPC, as a
sufficient time gap of 3 days was observed by the Trial Court between the
date of conviction and the date of awarding death sentence, which too
was awarded only after duly hearing the appellant, duly appreciating all
the  material  factors  and  circumstances,  and  duly  recording  special
reasons which take the present case into the rarest of rare category. 
29.1.The learned senior counsel for the respondent, while highlighting
the aggravating circumstances of this case, has submitted that the victim
was  a  feeble  minded  and  physically  challenged  girl;  and  when  the
appellant was known to the victim, there was an element of betrayal of
trust. The learned counsel would also refer to the fact that the victim girl
was lured by way of first offering chocolates, to submit that the entire
modus operandi  of the appellant was pre-meditated, leading to brutal
rape and murder of the hapless girl. The learned counsel has further
submitted that the extensive injuries on the private parts of the victim
were caused in a most diabolical and barbaric manner, which shows the
ghastly nature of crime; and the medical expert evidence has established
that the deceased died due to the injuries caused on her head. Thus, the
appellant not only committed rape in a ghastly manner but also clubbed
the victim to death by brutal smashing of her head. According to the
learned counsel, on the facts of this case, the circumstances as referred
on behalf of the appellant could hardly be said to be sufficiently mitigating
56the aggravated crime committed by the appellant. Thus, there are no
mitigating circumstances in this case and nature of crime is such that it
shocks  the  collective  conscience  of  society  and  shakes  the  very
foundation of civilization; and in this case, awarding of death sentence is
immensely justified.
29.2.Learned senior counsel for the respondent-State has cited various
decisions in relation to the question concerning death sentence and the
principles evolved by the Courts in that regard, including the requirement
of special reasons and rarest of rare doctrine, as elucidated in the case of
Bachan Singh  v. State of Punjab : (1980) 2 SCC 684 ; the requirement of
balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances, as explained
in the case of Machhi Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab : (1983) 3 SCC
470; and the crime and criminal test, as elaborated in Santosh Kumar
Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State of Maharashtra : (2009) 6 SCC 498 . 
29.3.As  regards  the  contentions  urged  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
invoking the doctrine of ‘residual doubt’, l earned senior counsel for the
respondent-State  has  contended  that  our  criminal  jurisprudence
recognises the requirement of ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’ to hold
any accused guilty; and any lingering doubt leads to the ‘benefit of doubt’
to the accused. Thus, there ought not be any uncertainty in coming to the
conclusion of guilt of the accused. According to the learned counsel, in
the  face  of  such  stringent  requirements  of  proof  beyond  reasonable
doubt, there is no place for any ‘residual doubt’ after the finding of guilt
57and consequential conviction of the accused. The learned counsel has
contended  that  the  concept  of  ‘residual  doubt’  has  not  been  found
applicable in our country; and has referred to the decision of this Court in
Shatrughna Baban Meshram v. State of Maharashtra : (2021) 1 SCC
596.    
29.4.While supporting the death sentence in the present case, learned
senior counsel for the respondent-State has submitted that the recurrent
underlying principles are that in the cases of rape and murder of a girl
child, if death occurs due to rape alone, then death sentence is normally
not awarded but, if rape is followed by separate act of murder, death
sentence  is  countenanced,  like  the  present  case  where,  apart  from
gruesome rape, the girl was done to death by causing horrific injuries on
her head. According to the learned counsel, the present case is similar
and akin to the cases where death sentence has been awarded and
maintained. In this regard, the learned counsel has particularly referred to
the decision in Kamta Tiwari v. State of M.P. : (1996) 6 SCC 250  as also
two  elaborate  decisions  in  Vasanta  Sampat  Dupare  v.  State  of
Maharashtra where, in the case of rape and murder of a four-year-old girl
child, death sentence was affirmed by this Court while dismissing the
main  appeals  [reported  as  (2015)  1  SCC  253 ]  and  then,  the  review
petitions  were  also  dismissed  with  the  finding  that  the  aggravating
circumstances  were  outweighing  the  alleged  mitigating  circumstances
[reported as (2017) 6 SCC 631 ].
5829.5.Learned  counsel  for  respondent  has  also  submitted  in  the
alternative that if at all death penalty is not affirmed by this Court, the
appellant ought to remain behind the bars for the remainder of his life
without any kind of remission, as per the course adopted by this Court in
the case of Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka : (2008) 13
SCC 767.
30.Apart from the factors relating to  the heinous nature  of crime
committed by the appellant, learned counsel for the respondent, in his
written submissions, has pointed out other startling facts leading to further
aggravating circumstances in view of the conduct of the appellant post-
conviction. These circumstances, as regards post-conviction conduct of
the appellant, have been stated as under: -
“B. Aggravating circumstances of the Criminal
a) Conduct of Criminal Post conviction whilst in jail (Committed
another murder with stone):
i)On dated 17.04.2015 the detainee had quarrelled with
another detainee Meharajuddin son of Chiragmuddin in Ward
No.  10,  whereupon  the  detainee  was  awarded  07  days
punishment.
ii)On dated 20.02.2019 the detainee had quarrelled along
with other detainees in the T.V. room of the Higher Security
Ward (Ward No. 10) constructed in the prison with detainee
Shakar Ulla @ Mohammed Hanif on account of watching TV
and  committed  murder  of  detainee  by  assaulting  with  the
stone used to put over TV. Detainee Manoj Pratap Singh son
of Surendra Pratap Singh has been convicted and sentenced
to life imprisonment by the learned Special Judge  (Prevention
of Sati) &  Addl. Sessions Judge, Jaipur Metropolitan, Jaipur
under Section 302/34 IPC. He’s a recidivist i.e. prove to killing
and people dangerous to society/jail inmates. ”
(underlining in original written submissions)
5930.1.The aforesaid factual aspects and circumstances relating to post-
conviction  conduct of  the appellant did not  surface earlier  during  the
course of oral hearing and looking to their nature and impact, we placed
the matter for directions on 16.02.2022 and required filing of an affidavit of
the authorised officer of the State, giving all the necessary particulars with
the concerned proceedings/judgment, while supplying advance copy to
the appellant in jail.  We also permitted the appellant to file response
thereto.  
30.2.Pursuant  to  the  directions  aforesaid,  an  affidavit  of  the
Superintendent of Central Jail, Jaipur has been filed with a copy of the
judgment and order dated 10.01.2020 passed by the Court of Special
Judge  (Prevention  of  Sati)  and  Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Jaipur
Metropolitan in Sessions Case No. 204 of 2019 (11 of 2019), making out
that the appellant has been convicted of the offence punishable under
Section 302/34 IPC with three other inmates of Central Jail, Jaipur. This
conviction came to be recorded after the said Trial Court found proved the
prosecution  case  that  the  accused  persons  (including  the  appellant)
committed  murder  of  another  inmate  of  high  security  ward,  namely,
Shakar  Ulla  @  Mohammed  Hanif,  a  Pakistani  national  who  was
undergoing sentence.
30.3.In response on behalf of the appellant to the facts above-stated,
reference has been made to paragraph 40 of the said judgment and order
dated 10.01.2020 with the submissions that the allegations in the said
60case had not been of any act by the appellant individually but in a group;
there was no eye-witness to the occurrence; the weapon used was only a
stone; and there was no evidence regarding specific overt act on the part
of the appellant. It has also been submitted that the said judgment and
order dated 10.01.2020 may not be taken into consideration by this Court
because the appellant has already filed an appeal against the same,
being Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 78 of 2020, which remains pending with
the High Court. It has also been submitted that except such allegation of
his  involvement  in  the  said  case,  overall  conduct  of  the  appellant  is
without any blemish; that he is a reformed person and not a menace to
the society.  It has also been urged that in the given circumstances,
psychological evaluation of the appellant may be ordered before deciding
finally the question of sentence.
31.We have given anxious consideration to the rival submissions and
have  scanned  through  the  entire  record  with  reference  to  the  law
applicable. 
The scope and width of these appeals
32.As noticed, the Trial Court and the High Court have concurrently
recorded the findings in this case that the prosecution has been able to
successfully  establish  the  chain  of  circumstances  leading  to  the  only
conclusion that the appellant is guilty of the offences of kidnapping, rape
and  murder  of  the  victim  girl.  The  fundamental  fact,  as  held  proved
against  the  appellant  is  that  the  victim,  a  seven-and-a-half-year  old
61mentally and physically challenged girl, was lastly seen in the company of
the appellant when he lured her and took her along with himself on his
motorcycle. The other significant fact, as held proved, is that the dead
body of the victim girl, her clothing, and the motorcycle used in the crime
were  recovered  at  a  faraway  place  at  the  instance  of  the  appellant.
Coupled  with  these  two  aspects  are  the  factors  that  there  were
bloodstains on the clothes of the appellant when he was found at the bus
stand  after  about  7½  hours  of  the  incident  of  kidnapping  and  that
bloodstains were also found on the body of the motorcycle; and the DNA
profile obtained from these bloodstains matched with the DNA profile of
the  blood  sample  of  the  victim  girl.  Added  to  these  had  been  the
circumstance that the appellant failed to explain his whereabouts since he
was last seen with the victim girl as also about his knowledge of the
location of her dead body. These facts and factors, taken together with
the medical evidence that there were several injuries all over the body of
the victim girl including gruesome injuries on her private parts and horrific
injuries on her head, are said to be of a complete chain of circumstances,
leading to the conclusion on the guilt of the appellant in relation to the
offences of kidnapping, rape and murder.
33.As could be readily noticed, the concurrent findings leading to the
appellant’s conviction have been challenged as if it were a matter of
regular appeal; and as if inviting re-appreciation of entire evidence  on its
contents as also its surrounding factors . However, we cannot lose sight of
62the fact that the present one is a matter of concurrent findings of fact by
the Trial Court and the High Court. Though the parameters  of examining
the matters in  an  appeal  by  special leave under Article 136 of the
Constitution  of India have been laid down repeatedly by this Court in
several of the decisions but, having  regard to the submissions made in
this case, we may usefully iterate what has been observed in the case of
Pappu v. The State of Uttar Pradesh : Criminal Appeal Nos. 1097-1098
of 2018 decided on 09.02.2022  wherein, after referring to  Articles 134
and 136 of the Constitution of  India and Section 2 of the Supreme Court
(Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970 as also with a
detailed reference to  several of the relevant decisions10, this Court has
summed up the subtle but relevant  distinction in the scope of a regular
appeal and an appeal by special  leave in the following words: - 
“20.In summation of what has been noticed hereinabove, it
is  but  clear  that  as  against  any  judgment/final  order  or
sentence in a criminal proceeding of the High Court, regular
appeals  to  this  Court  are  envisaged  in  relation  to  the
eventualities specified in Article 134 of the Constitution of
India and Section 2 of the Act of 1970. The present one is
not a matter covered thereunder and the present appeals
are  by  special  leave  in  terms  of  Article  136  of  the
Constitution of India. In such an appeal by special leave,
where the Trial Court and the High Court have concurrently
returned the findings of fact after appreciation of evidence,
each and every finding of fact cannot be contested nor such
an  appeal  could  be  dealt  with  as  if  another  forum  for
reappreciation of evidence. Of course, if the assessment by
the  Trial  Court  and  the  High  Court  could  be  said  to  be
vitiated by any error of law or procedure or misreading of
evidence or in disregard to the norms of judicial process
10 Like those in the cases of  Pritam Singh v. State: AIR 1950 SC 169;  Ramaniklal
Gokaldas and Ors. v.  State of Gujarat: (1976) 1 SCC 6; Mst Dalbir Kaur and Ors. v. State
of Punjab: (1976) 4 SCC 158;  and Hari & Anr. v. The State of Uttar Pradesh : Criminal
Appeal      No. 186 of 2018 decided on 26.11.2021.
63leading to serious prejudice or injustice, this Court may, and
in  appropriate  cases  would,  interfere  in  order  to  prevent
grave or serious miscarriage of justice but, such a course is
adopted  only  in  rare  and  exceptional  cases  of  manifest
illegality. Tersely put, it is not a matter of regular appeal. This
Court would not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact
based on pure appreciation of evidence nor it is the scope of
these appeals that this Court would enter into reappreciation
of evidence so as to take a view different than that taken by
the Trial Court and approved by the High Court.”
34.Keeping the principles aforesaid in view, we may examine if the
concurrent  findings  call  for  any  interreference  while  reiterating  that
wholesome reappreciation of evidence is not within the scope of these
appeals, even though we have scanned through the entire evidence in
order to appropriately deal with the rival submissions.
Procedural questions relating to investigation and trial 
35.Before dealing with the contentions relating to the evidence on
record, we deem it appropriate to address the procedural aspects put in
question by the learned counsel for the appellant, particularly relating to
the investigation and the trial in this matter.  
35.1.The  contentions  urged  by  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant
against the process of investigation have only been noted to be rejected.
The chronology of the events and steps in the investigation leave nothing
to doubt that the Investigating Officers of this case (the SHO PW-20
Ganesh Nath and the Circle Officer PW-25 Umesh Ojha) and other police
officers have indeed methodically discharged their duties. Rather than
finding  faults  or  shortcomings  in  the  investigation,  we  could  only
appreciate  the  thoroughness  of  investigation,  where  every  step  was
64appropriately and punctually taken and all the relevant processes were
methodically  documented;  and  where  the  charge-sheet  was  swiftly
presented to the Court with all relevant particulars. 
35.2.As  per  the  evidence  on  record,  the  information  referable  to
Section  27  of  the  Indian  Evidence  Act,  187211 as  furnished  by  the
appellant  at  2:30  a.m.  on  18.01.2013  was  duly  recorded  by  PW-20
Ganesh  Nath  (Ex.  P-40).  Thereafter, the  appellant  was  taken  to  the
location of the dead body of the victim girl and the same was recovered
as  per  the  said  information  furnished  by  the  appellant.  There  is  no
substance in the contention  against  the process taken  up  by PW-20
Ganesh Nath after the arrest of the appellant. Similarly, there does not
appear to be any unusual manner in which evidence against the appellant
for other cases was collected.  As noticed, last one of the other cases
against the appellant was that of theft of the very same motorcycle, which
was used in the present crime. The other thread of contentions against
the  process  of  investigation,  about  placing  reliance  on  the  personal
opinion of doctors, is very difficult to be appreciated. The doctors of the
Medical Board were rather under bounden duty to state their opinion,
particularly as regards the nature and duration of injuries and the cause of
death. 
35.3.The suggestions that the charge-sheet was filed within 12 days of
his arrest and even without receipt of DNA report and that the appellant
11  Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Evidence Act’.
65should have been given more time to study the police report stand rather
at conflict with the desirability of prompt proceedings by the investigating
agency and also by the Trial Court in such matters. The constitutional
guarantees of equality before law, protection of life and personal liberty,
protection in respect of conviction, and protection against the arrest and
detention, do not expand into a corresponding right with an accused
person  to  question  the  swiftness  of  investigation  and  expeditious
proceedings of the trial or to suggest that he has to be tried at a pace of
his choice. It sounds rather preposterous that an accused would question
the  trial  proceedings  only  because  of  the  pace  maintained  by  the
prosecution  and  the  Trial  Court  so  as  to  take  the  trial  to  its  logical
conclusion at the earliest. While rejecting the contentions urged on behalf
of  the  appellant,  we  would  rather  observe  that  the  speed  and  pace
expected in the cases like the present one,  per force, require utmost
expedition by the investigating agency as also by the Trial Court.
35.4.The contention that the appellant was deprived of his right of
defence and he was given services of an inexperienced counsel remain
too far-stretched and rather unjustified.  Apart that no such grievance was
ever suggested before the Trial Court or even before the High Court, we
find from the record that legal aid counsel was appointed at the request of
the appellant himself and in fact, the  Trial  Court  proceeded  with the
matter only after appointment of a counsel for the appellant.  A perusal of
the record further makes it clear that the legal aid counsel left no stone
66unturned to defend the appellant and thoroughly cross-examined each
and every witness to the minutest and minor details. He contested every
proposition of the prosecution and even the application for recalling of
PW-1 (only for the purpose of identification of the clothes of deceased,
which were received later from FSL) was also thoroughly contested by
him by filing a reply and contending that the prosecution was trying to fill
up a lacuna in their case. Hereinbefore, we have referred to the extensive
contentions urged on behalf of the accused-appellant by the legal aid
counsel,  as  dealt  with  by  the  Trial  Court  in  its  judgment  dated
28.09.201312.
Having examined the record, we find the criticism in this appeal against
the conduct of case by the legal aid counsel to be unwarranted and rather
unfair. The said counsel had indeed faithfully discharged his duties and
had thoroughly defended the appellant. As regards the defence version, it
has not been shown if the appellant ever suggested to the counsel about
his desire to have one or more meetings with him or to confer with him
about any particular line of defence. We are constrained to observe that
the  negative  comments  qua the  said  legal  aid  counsel  cannot  be
countenanced and raising of such contentions in this appeal is difficult to
be appreciated; these contentions are rejected in toto.
Concurrent findings of fact: whether requiring interference?
12 Vide paragraphs 18, 18.1 and 18.2 (supra). 
6736.Moving on to the submissions assailing the findings on guilt of the
appellant,  we  may  reiterate  that  the  present  case  is  based  on
circumstantial evidence where the Trial Court and the High Court have
concurrently recorded their findings that the prosecution has been able to
successfully  establish  the  chain  of  circumstances  leading  to  the
unmistakable conclusion that the appellant is guilty of the offences of
kidnapping, rape and murder of the victim girl. However, learned counsel
for  the  appellant  has  endeavoured  to  project  certain  so-called
shortcomings and lacunae in the prosecution case. While dealing with
such  submissions,  we may  usefully  take  note  of  the  basic  principles
relating to a case based on circumstantial evidence. 
36.1.The principles explained and enunciated in the case of Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra:  (1984) 4 SCC
116 remain a guiding light for the Courts in regard to the proof of a case
based  on  circumstantial  evidence,  wherein  this  Court  referred  to  the
celebrated  decision  in  the  case  of  Hanumant  v.  State  of  Madhya
Pradesh.:  AIR  1952  SC  343  and  deduced  five  golden  principles,
panchsheel , of proving a case based on circumstantial evidence in the
following passages: -
“152............It may be useful to extract what Mahajan, J. has laid
down in Hanumant case:
“It is well to remember that in cases where the evidence is
of  a circumstantial nature, the circumstances from which
the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first
instance be  fully  established,  and  all the  facts so
established should be  consistent only  with the hypothesis
of  the guilt  of  the  accused.  Again,  the  circumstances
68should be of a conclusive nature and tendency and they
should be such as to exclude  every hypothesis  but the one
proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a
chain of evidence so far complete as  not to leave any
reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and it must be  such as to show
that within all human probability the act must  have been
done by the accused.”
153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following
conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an accused
can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be
drawn should  be fully established.
It may be noted here that  this Court indicated that the
circumstances  concerned “must or should” and not “may be”
established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction
between “may be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as
was held by this Court in  Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade  v.  State of
Maharashtra  [(1973) 2 SCC 793] where the observations  were
made:
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the  accused must
be and not merely may be guilty before a court can convict
and the mental distance between  ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is
long and divides  vague  conjectures  from sure
conclusions.”
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should
not be explainable  on any other hypothesis except that the
accused is guilty,
(3)  the circumstances  should be of a conclusive nature and
tendency,
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one
to be proved, and
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave
any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and must show that in all human
probability the  act must have been done by the accused.
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the
panchsheel  of the proof of a case based on circumstantial
evidence.
155. It may be interesting to note that as regards the mode of
proof in a criminal case depending on circumstantial evidence, in
the absence of a corpus delicti, the statement of law as to proof of
the same was laid down by Gresson, J. (and concurred by 3 more
Judges) in King v. Horry [1952 NZLR 111] thus:
“Before he can be convicted, the fact of death should  be
proved by such circumstances  as render the commission
of the crime morally certain   and leave no ground for
reasonable doubt: the circumstantial evidence should be
69so cogent and  compelling as to convince a jury that upon
no rational hypothesis other than murder can the facts be
accounted for.”
156. Lord Goddard slightly modified the expression “morally
certain” by “such circumstances as render the commission of the
crime certain”.
157. This indicates the cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence
that a case can be said to be proved only when there is certain
and explicit evidence and no person can be convicted on pure
moral conviction...”
37.Keeping the aforesaid principles in view, when we examine the
contentions of the learned counsel for the appellant, we find nothing of
substance therein.
37.1.It has been contended on behalf of the appellant that his name
was not mentioned in the first missing person report lodged in this matter,
as admitted by PW-1 Kamla and PW-3 Madan Lal; and that the said first
report has not been placed on record. This contention has its roots in the
last line occurring in the statement made by PW-1 Kamla in her cross-
examination that she had lodged a missing person report in which the
name of appellant was not stated. It may also have its basis in the
statement made by PW-3 Madan Lal in his cross-examination that after
the accused Manoj Pratap Singh took away the child, they went to Police
Post Bandiyabada, where missing report was lodged. 
37.1.1. The contention is, however, totally detached from reality as also
from  the  factual  matrix.  It  has  been  consistently  maintained  that  the
appellant kidnapped the victim girl at about 6:30 p.m. from the vending
cart of PW-1 Kamla. It has been proved by all the relevant witnesses that
the attempts were made to chase the appellant but he could not be
70stopped.  Though  no  such  report  made  in  writing  at  Police  Post
Bandiyabada is on record but, even if it be assumed that they first went to
the said police post (as stated by PW-3), so far giving the name of the
appellant as the person kidnapping the child is concerned, PW-3 had
been specific that his name was known to them and was given to the
police post too. Reference to some report at the said police post carries
hardly  any  adverse  impact  on  the  prosecution  case  because  the
information stated in the form of complaint by PW-1 Kamla accompanied
by PW-3 Madan Lal was indeed recorded in writing by PW-19 Nand Lal at
8:15 p.m. at the police station. It has been established that the police
station was at a distance of about 7 km from the place of kidnapping.  It
has also been pointed out by PW-1 that it took about 30 to 45 minutes to
reach the police station in an auto and the oral report was made at 8:15
p.m.  In  view  of  the  specific  facts  stated  in  unison  by  the  relevant
prosecution witnesses that the name and identity of the kidnapper was
known to them, coupled with the time that elapsed from the moment of
kidnapping (around 6:30 p.m.) and until lodging of the report at the police
station (around 8:15 p.m.) while providing for commuting time, there was
neither any occasion nor any reason for the prosecution witnesses to omit
the name of the appellant.
37.1.2.The report (Ex. P-1) and the FIR registered on its basis (Ex. P-2)
had been specific, not only giving the name of the appellant (though in the
report, the name given was Manoj Singh and not Manoj Pratap Singh) but
71further to that, the informant also stated her knowledge that the person
concerned was the one who was earlier living in the Housing Board
Colony.  In the face of the contents of the report Ex. P-1 and the FIR Ex.
P- 2 as also the consistent testimony of PW-1 Kamla, PW-2 Dharam Das,
PW-3 Madan Lal, PW-5 Maniraj Singh and PW-17 Dinesh Bhatia, who
stated in no uncertain terms that it was the appellant who kidnapped the
victim girl, the contention urged on behalf of the appellant could only be
rejected. Moreover, PW-12 Ranjit Singh has established a crucial fact that
around the very same time as that of kidnapping of the victim girl, the
appellant reached the liquor shop and purchased beer while a girl child
was sitting on his motorcycle. The testimony of this witness has also
remained unshaken in the cross-examination. The appellant has not been
able to show as to why this independent witness would at all be deposing
against him. The appellant has further failed to explain if the girl child
sitting on his motorcycle at the time of purchasing beer from the shop of
PW-12 Ranjit Singh was not the victim girl but anyone else.
37.1.3.Thus, the evidence on record is categorical and clear that the
victim girl was last seen alive only with the appellant. 
37.2.The other part of contention with reference to the medical and
other scientific evidence also carry no substance whatsoever. It has been
argued, by relying on one sentence in the deposition of one of the doctors
of Medical Board during cross-examination that the death might have
been caused as a result of rape, that the appellant had not intended to
72cause  death.  The  post-mortem  report  (Ex.  P-35),  as  reproduced
hereinbefore leaves nothing to doubt that the hapless victim sustained
extensive injuries all over her body and the injuries particularly on her
head as also on the private parts had been rather horrific. Her death
ultimately had been due to head injuries, as opined by the doctors of the
Medical Board. We have reproduced hereinbefore the relevant part of the
statement of PW-14 Dr. Manju Purohit, a member of the Medical Board
conducting  post-mortem  examination13.  The  expressions  “brutal”,
“inhuman”, “cruel” etc. came in her statement with reference to the Court
question,  where  she  was  asked  her  expert  medical  opinion  after
conducting  external  and  internal  examination  of  injuries  and  after
analysing the circumstances and condition of body; and she opined with
reference to the injuries that ‘ the eight year old innocent girl had been
brutally and inhumanly raped and on objecting, the person who raped her
behaved in an inhuman and cruel manner as a result of which, she
sustained different simple and grievous injuries due to which she died’.
She  further  pointed  out  her  opinion  about  brutality  while  stating  that
‘laceration of the vagina of the deceased shows that she was brutally
raped in an inhuman manner’. However, in her further cross-examination,
this  witness  categorically  affirmed  the  opinion  stated  by  the  Medical
Board in the post-mortem report about the cause of death and clearly
stated that ‘ the cause of death was injury caused on the head ’. In the
13 Vide paragraph 8.3 (supra).
73given  set  of  circumstances  and  cogent  expert  medical  evidence,  the
absence of semen on the body of the victim or in the vaginal swab is
hardly  of  any  bearing  on  the  substance  of  the  matter.  Hence,  the
contentions urged on behalf of the appellant in relation to the medical
evidence remain baseless and stand rejected. In continuity, we may also
observe that the submissions suggestive of the victim having received
only bruises and abrasions apart from injury on head are also incorrect. A
bare reference to the extensive post-mortem report (Ex. P-35) and the
statements of the doctors of the Medical Board PW-14, PW-15 and PW-
21 is sufficient to reject these suggestions. 
37.2.1.Apart from the above, one line occurring in the deposition of PW-
21 Dr. Chetna Vaishnav has been picked up to build an argument on
behalf of the appellant that the death of the victim girl might have been
caused as a result of rape; and it has been submitted that causing death
cannot be taken to be the intention of the appellant. The argument is
premised on a wrong and incomplete reading of the statement of PW-21
Dr. Chetna Vaishnav.  She too had been categorical in her examination-
in-chief about the post-mortem report and had deposed consistently with
PW-14 Dr. Manju  Purohit and PW-15 Dr. Kailash Chand  that  as per
Medical Board, the head injury was the cause of death. She reasserted
this fact in her cross-examination too, while stating that ‘ in the opinion of
medical board, multiple injuries were found on the head of the deceased
which collectively resulted in death of the deceased ’. She had, of course,
74stated in her examination-in-chief that ‘ the deceased was subjected to
brutal rape and her death was caused ’ but, reading her testimony as a
whole, it is but clear that in this sentence, what she intended to convey
was about two different acts, i.e., of committing rape and of causing
death. She had not stated that death was caused by rape. 
37.2.2.Having examined the post-mortem report and the testimonies of
the doctors conducting post-mortem, we are clearly of the view that even
by  distortion  of  language  occurring  in  their  testimonies,  it  cannot  be
deduced that there was any doubt or difference of opinion in the Medical
Board about the cause of death. In other words, the doctors had been
clear, categorical and consistent that the victim girl died due to the injuries
caused on her head.
37.3.As regards another contention about the doubts on collection of
blood  samples  from  the  metal  surface  of  the  motorcycle  in  question
because of the alleged rain or drizzling or storm, first of all it may be
mentioned  that  there  had  not  been  any  specific  evidence  about  any
excessive rain in the nature of storm. It has, of course, been stated by the
witnesses  that  at  the  time  of  kidnapping  of  the  victim  girl,  it  was
raining/drizzling. However, there is no such evidence that at the time of
arrest of the appellant, or at the time of his disclosure statement at about
2:00 a.m. on 18.01.2013, or at the time of recovery of dead body at about
3:15 a.m. on 18.01.2013, or at the time of recovery of motorcycle at about
4:45 p.m. on 19.01.2013, or at the time of collection of blood sample from
75the motorcycle at about 5:00 p.m. on 19.01.2013, there had been any
such rain or drizzle for which, the requisite samples could not have been
collected. This is apart from the fact that FSL had clearly and undoubtedly
performed  DNA  test  on  the  blood  sample  collected  from  motorcycle
(packet marked D-Exhibit No. 6 in the FSL report Ex. P-51). Thus, the
submission doubting the collection of blood sample from the motorcycle is
also totally baseless and stands rejected. 
37.4.The other submission seeking to question the factum of mental
and physical disabilities of the victim girl does not carry any substance at
all. Apart from the fact that mental and physical disabilities of the child
have been consistently stated by her parents and grandfather, the fact of
the matter remains that way back on 04.03.2010, the Medical  Board
found her suffering from spastic palsy (vide Ex. P-11); and PW-18 Dr.
Narendra  Paliwal  indeed  proved  the  said  certificate.  In  fact,  the
Investigating  Officer  PW-25  Umesh  Ojha  took  care  to  seek  medical
opinion/comments regarding the nature of disablement of the victim girl
with reference to the said certificate Ex. P-11 by way of a communication
dated 22.01.2013 (Ex.- 52) and thereupon, the Medical Officer made his
endorsement to the effect that ‘ her cordination movements of limbs which
are controlled by brain were disturbed and as such she was physically
and mentally challenged child ’. The submissions as regards evidentiary
value  of  school  certificates  carry  no  meaning  when  the  matter  is
examined with reference to the overall evidence on record, which leaves
76nothing  to  doubt  that  the  victim  girl  was  a  mentally  and  physically
challenged child. Percentage of disablement is not the matter in issue
here. The relevant facts are that she was suffering from mental  and
physical disabilities and was below 8 years of age. These facts are duly
proved on record. 
38.Hence, the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant seeking to
question the concurrent findings by reference to certain non-existent or
irrelevant factors need to be rejected altogether. 
39.We may  usefully  summarise  the  facts  and  factors  established
beyond doubt on record forming the complete chain of circumstances
that:  a)  the  deceased  was  seven-and-a-half-years  old  mentally  and
physically  challenged  girl;  b)  the  deceased  was  last  seen  with  the
appellant when he kidnapped her from the lawful guardianship of her
parents; c) the appellant was arrested within about 7½ hours of kidnap; d)
the clothes worn by the appellant were bloodstained, which were seized
and sealed; e) after about 1½ hours of his arrest, the dead body of the
victim  girl  was recovered  at  a faraway place on the  disclosure and
information of the appellant; f) the motorcycle used by the appellant and
the frock worn by the victim girl were also recovered at a faraway place at
the disclosure and information of the appellant; g) the appellant failed to
account for his own whereabouts as also the whereabouts of the victim
girl since after the time of kidnap; h) the appellant also failed to show the
reason of his knowledge about the place/places where the dead body, the
77motorcycle  and  the  frock  were  recovered;  i)  as per  the  evidence  on
record, it had been a case of brutal rape (with gruesome injuries on and
around private parts) and merciless killing (with horrific injuries on head)
of the victim girl; j) the victim died due to the injuries on her head; k) the
DNA profile of blood collected from the person and clothing of the victim
girl matched with the DNA profile of blood found on the coat, pant and
shirt of the appellant and on the motorcycle14. This chain is so complete in
itself that no stretch of imagination could take us to any other hypothesis
except  the  guilt  of  the  appellant  in  relation  to  the  offences  charged.
Hence, the concurrent findings of the Trial Court and the High Court
holding the appellant guilty are imminently just and proper; and call for no
interference whatsoever. 
39.1.We may  also  indicate  at  least  two  other  facts  established  on
record which not only strengthen the complete chain of circumstances
noticed above but, have their own bearing in this matter. The first one of
these facts, which is duly attached to the chain of circumstances, is that
the motorcycle used in this crime bearing registration number RJ30 3M
5944 was itself stolen on 14.01.2013 for which, a theft report had already
14 The value and worth of DNA profile matching in criminal cases has been succinctly stated by
this Court in the case of Anil @ Anthony Arikswamy Joseph v. State of Maharashtra : 2014
(4) SCC 69 in the following terms: -
“18. Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is a molecule that encodes the genetic
information in all living organisms. DNA genotype can be obtained from any
biological material such as bone, blood, semen, saliva, hair, skin, etc. Now, for
several years, DNA profile has also shown a tremendous impact on forensic
investigation. Generally, when DNA profile of a sample found at the scene of
crime  matches  with  the  DNA  profile  of  the  suspect,  it  can  generally  be
concluded that both the samples have the same biological origin. DNA profile is
valid and reliable, but variance in a particular result depends on the quality
control and quality procedure in the laboratory.”
78been lodged at Police Station Nathdwara, as distinctly proved by PW-23
Ramdev Regar, Sub-Inspector of Police. It has been duly established on
record that the appellant indeed used that motorcycle in kidnapping the
victim  girl  and  the  motorcycle  was  recovered  as  per  the  information
supplied by the appellant. It has not been a case of the appellant that the
motorcycle belonged to him or was given to him by its owner. Thus,
undoubtedly, the  appellant  used  stolen  motorcycle  in  committing  this
crime. The second one of these facts, duly established by the testimony
of PW-12 Ranjeet Singh, had been that after kidnapping the victim girl
from the lawful guardianship of her parents, the appellant headed towards
the liquor shop with the victim girl sitting on the motorcycle; he purchased
a bottle of beer and he even quarrelled as regards the price; and he left
the liquor shop with a bottle of beer and with the victim girl sitting on the
motorcycle. These facts and factors only worsen the criminality of conduct
duly found proved against the appellant. 
40.For what has been discussed hereinabove, we have not an iota of
doubt that  the present case of circumstantial  evidence answers to  the
panchsheel  principles of Sharad Birdhichand  Sarda (supra). The
appellant was rightly convicted by the Trial Court and his  conviction has
rightly been maintained by the High Court. To put it in other words, having
examined the matter in its totality, we are satisfied that the prosecution
has been able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, rather beyond
any  doubt  whatsoever. The  chain  of  circumstances  projected  by  the
79prosecution is complete in its entirety and leads only to the result that the
appellant had been the person who kidnapped, raped and murdered the
victim, seven-and-a-half-years old mentally and physically challenged girl.
Hence, the concurrent findings leading to conviction of the appellant of
the offences aforementioned call for no interference; and deserve to be
confirmed.
41.Even  when  we  uphold  the  concurrent  findings  leading  to
conviction  of  the  appellant,  the  question  remains  about  the  death
sentence awarded to him for the offence under Section 302 IPC, which
has been seriously challenged in these appeals.  Before proceeding to
deal with this major question calling for determination in this case, we
may dispose of one of the unnecessary submissions made on behalf of
the appellant as regards his conviction both under POCSO and IPC. This
submission, made with reference to Section 42 POCSO, is also baseless.
The mandate for awarding punishment which is greater in degree does
not correspondingly lead to the proposition that the appellant could not
have been convicted of the offence under Section 376 IPC as also under
Section 6 POCSO. This aspect need not detain us much longer because
the core question in this case after confirmation of conviction is as to
whether death sentence awarded for the offence under Section 302 IPC
be maintained or be substituted by any other sentence. 
Whether death sentence be maintained or substituted by any other
sentence
80 42.As noticed, two-fold submissions have been put at the forefront by
learned  senior  counsel  for  the  appellant  in  challenge  to  the  death
sentence awarded in this case. First, that the present case is based on
circumstantial evidence rather than absolute proof and therefore, benefit
of ‘residual doubt’ ought to be given to the appellant and capital sentence
should not be awarded because, the present case may be a rare one but
is not the rarest of rare. Secondly, learned senior counsel has referred to
the mitigating factors wherefor the appellant deserves to be spared from
capital sentence, being those of his young age at the time of commission
of the crime in question; his poor economic background; his having family
with wife, minor daughter and aged father; and strong probability of his
reformation.  Per contra , learned senior counsel for the respondent-State
has  highlighted the aggravating  circumstances  that  the  appellant  had
kidnapped, raped and murdered a mentally and physically challenged girl
child; that his acts and actions disclose his planning and pre-meditated
actions; and that the ghastly crime was committed in a diabolical and
barbaric manner. Apart from other factors, learned senior counsel for the
respondent-State  has  highlighted  the  facts  about  post-conviction
felonious conduct of the appellant where once he was awarded 7 days’
punishment  for  quarrelling  with  another  detainee  and  then,  he  was
convicted of the offence under Section 302/34 IPC for killing of another
jail inmate. Learned counsel for the respondent would submit that the
appellant has proven himself to be a recidivist, the person who is prone to
81killing  people, has committed  crimes  in the past  and has  shown  the
tendency to relapse into crime repeatedly, and is dangerous to society. 
42.1.Apropos  the  rival  submissions  and  the  fact  that  the  sentence
under consideration is that of termination of a natural life, it is obvious that
the matter calls for a serious and heightened scrutiny of all the relevant
aspects, with reference to the statutory requirements as also the legal
principles enunciated by this Court.  
Death sentence: Evolution of principles and norms
43.As regards the statutory requirements, as per sub-section (2) of
Section  235  CrPC,  on  being  convicted  and  not  being  released  on
probation or after admonition in terms of Section 360 CrPC, the accused
has to be heard by the Judge concerned on the question of sentence and
then, sentence has to be passed according to law. Moreover, as per sub-
section  (3)  of  Section  354  CrPC,  if  the  conviction  is  for  an  offence
punishable with death or in the alternative, with imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a particular term of years, the judgment has to state the
reasons for the sentence awarded; and in case of death sentence, the
judgment has to state ‘special reasons’ therefor. 
43.1.Sub-section (2) of  Section 235  CrPC, providing  for mandatory
hearing of the accused before passing sentence, reads as under: -
“(2)  If  the  accused  is  convicted,  the  Judge  shall,  unless  he
proceeds in accordance with the provisions of section 360, hear
the accused on the question of sentence, and then pass sentence
on him according to law.”
8243.2.Sub-section  (3)  of  Section  354  CrPC,  requiring  reasons  for
sentence  and  ‘special  reasons’ in  case  of  death  sentence,  reads  as
under:- 
“(3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or,
in the alternative, with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a
term  of  years,  the  judgment  shall  state  the  reasons  for  the
sentence awarded, and, in the case of sentence of death, the
special reasons for such sentence.”
44.We may now usefully summarise the salient features of evolution
of legal principles and norms for dealing with the question of sentencing
in such matters where the sentence of death could also be awarded,
particularly with reference to the leading cases and expositions therein.
44.1.In the case of Jagmohan Singh v. The State of U.P. : (1973) 1
SCC 20, the questions in their broader spectrum were raised about the
constitutional impermissibility of death sentence with the submissions: (i)
that the death sentence was unreasonable for it would put an end to all
the rights guaranteed under clauses (a) to (g) of Article 19(1) of the
Constitution  of  India;  (ii)  that  the  discretion  vested  in  the  Judges  to
impose capital punishment was not based on any standards or policy and
hence, the provision suffered from the vice of excessive delegation of
legislative function; (iii) that the uncontrolled and unguided discretion in
the Judges to impose capital punishment or imprisonment for life was hit
by Article 14 of the Constitution of India; and (iv) that under Article 21 of
the Constitution, no person shall be deprived of his life except according
to the procedure established by law but, the provisions of law did not
83provide  a  procedure  for  trial  of  factors  and  circumstances  crucial  for
making the choice between the capital punishment and imprisonment for
life. 
44.1.1.The  Constitution  Bench  rejected  the  aforesaid  and  corollary
arguments  while  pointing  out,  inter  alia,  that  the  provisions  in  the
Constitution of India, like those of Articles 72(1)(c), 72(3), 21, 134 as also
the then applicable provisions of Sections 401 and 402 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898 were indicative that capital sentence had not
been regarded per se unreasonable or not in public interest; and that the
policy of law in giving a very wide discretion in the matter of punishment
to the Judge has its origin in the impossibility of laying down standards,
rather exercise of judicial discretion on well-recognised principles is the
safest possible safeguards for the accused.15 As regards the contentions
urged on the anvil of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, the Bench
observed that the Court in such matters would be principally concerned
with  the  facts  and  circumstances,  whether  aggravating  or  mitigating,
which are connected with the particular crime under inquiry and which are
capable of being proved in accordance with the laws of procedure; and
15 The Constitution Bench underscored the significance and worth of judicial discretion in the
following words: -
“26…...The impossibility of laying down standards is at the very core of the
criminal law as administered in India which invests the judges with a very wide
discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment. The discretion in the
matter of sentence is, as already pointed out, liable to be corrected by superior
courts. Laying down of standards to the limited extent possible as was done in
the Model Judicial Code would not serve the purpose. The exercise of judicial
discretion  on  well-recognised  principles  is,  in  the  final  analysis,  the  safest
possible safeguards for the accused.”
84finally the parties on both sides were having opportunity to address the
Court whereafter the Judge would decide on the guilt and punishment.
The Constitution Bench observed that the relevant provisions were part of
the procedure established by law and those provisions were not shown to
be constitutionally invalid. Thus, the Bench concluded that ‘ the death
sentence  imposed  after  trial  in  accordance  with  the  procedure
established by law is not unconstitutional under Article 21.’  
44.2.Two major factors/events after the decision in Jagmohan  (supra)
led to another reference to the Constitution Bench of this Court in regard
to the constitutional validity of death penalty for the offence of murder as
also of the sentencing procedure. One had been the amendment of the
law relating to criminal procedure with advent of the Code of the Criminal
Procedure,  1973  in  replacement  of  the  old  Code  of  1898,  which
introduced,  as  regards  sentencing  procedure,  the  above-quoted  sub-
section (2) of Section 235 and sub-section (3) of Section 354. Several
persons convicted of murder and sentenced to death filed the petitions
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India challenging the constitutional
validity of death penalty provided in Section 302 IPC for the offence of
murder and that of the sentencing procedure provided in sub-section (3)
of Section 354 CrPC. The other one had been the majority opinion of a 3-
Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Rajendra Prasad v. State of
Uttar Pradesh : (1979) 3 SCC 646 , purportedly seeking to whittle down
the  ratio  of  Jagmohan  (supra);  and  correctness  of  such  an  opinion
85having been doubted by another Bench of this Court. The reference so
made to the Constitution Bench came to be answered in  locus classicus
Bachan Singh  (supra) with its ‘rarest of rare’ doctrine. The opinion of
majority in Bachan Singh  is the guiding light and foundational discipline
for all the later developments and enunciations on the subject.  
44.3.In  Bachan Singh  (supra), the Constitution Bench of this Court
examined two major questions, i.e., as to whether death penalty provided
for the offence of murder under Section 302 IPC was unconstitutional;
and if not, as to whether the sentencing procedure in Section 354(3)
CrPC was unconstitutional on the ground that it invested the Court with
unguided and untrammelled discretion.
44.3.1.After having examined a variety of features and factors pertaining
to Articles 19(1) and 21 of the Constitution of India, the Court (per majority
of the Constitution Bench) answered the first question in the negative,
while observing and pointing out, inter alia, as under: -
“132. To sum up, the question whether or not death penalty serves
any  penological  purpose  is  a  difficult,  complex  and  intractable
issue. It has evoked strong, divergent views. For the purpose of
testing the constitutionality of the impugned provision as to death
penalty  in  Section  302  of  the  Penal  Code  on  the  ground  of
reasonableness  in  the  light  of  Articles  19  and  21  of  the
Constitution, it is not necessary for us to express any categorical
opinion, one way or the other, as to which of these two antithetical
views, held by the Abolitionists and Retentionists, is correct. It is
sufficient to say that the very fact that persons of reason, learning
and light are rationally and deeply divided in their opinion on this
issue,  is  a  ground  among  others,  for  rejecting  the  petitioners
argument  that  retention  of  death  penalty  in  the  impugned
provision,  is  totally  devoid  of  reason  and  purpose.  If,
notwithstanding the view of the Abolitionists to the contrary, a very
large segment of people, the world over, including sociologists,
legislators, jurists, judges and administrators still firmly believe in
86the worth and necessity of capital punishment for the protection of
society, if in the perspective of prevailing crime conditions in India,
contemporary  public  opinion  channelized  through  the  people's
representatives  in  Parliament,  has  repeatedly  in  the  last  three
decades, rejected all attempts, including the one made recently, to
abolish or specifically restrict the area of death penalty, if death
penalty is still a recognised legal sanction for murder or some
types of murder in most of the civilised countries in the world, if the
framers of the Indian Constitution were fully aware — as we shall
presently show they were — of the existence of death penalty as
punishment for murder, under the Penal Code, 1860, if the 35th
Report  and  subsequent  reports  of  the  Law  Commission
suggesting retention of death penalty, and recommending revision
of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  and  the  insertion  of  the  new
Sections  235(2)  and  354(3)  in  that  Code  providing  for  pre-
sentence  hearing  and  sentencing  procedure  on  conviction  for
murder and other capital offences were before the Parliament and
presumably considered by it when in 1972-1973 it took up revision
of the Code of 1898 and replaced it by the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, it is not possible to hold that the provision of
death penalty as an alternative punishment for murder, in Section
302 of the  Penal  Code is unreasonable  and not  in the  public
interest.  We  would,  therefore,  conclude  that  the  impugned
provision in Section 302, violates neither the letter nor the ethos of
Article 19.
*** *** ***
136. Article 21 reads as under:
“No  person  shall be  deprived  of  his  life or  personal
liberty  except  according  to  procedure  established  by
law.”
If this Article is expanded in accordance with the interpretative
principle indicated in  Maneka Gandhi  [(1978) 1 SCC 248], it will
read as follows:
“No  person  shall be  deprived  of  his  life or  personal
liberty  except  according  to  fair, just  and  reasonable
procedure established by valid law.”
In the converse positive form, the expanded Article will read as
below:
“A person may be deprived of his life or personal liberty
in accordance with fair, just and reasonable procedure
established by valid law.”
Thus expanded and read for interpretative purposes, Article 21
clearly  brings  out  the  implication,  that  the  founding  fathers
recognised the right of the State to deprive a person of his life or
personal  liberty  in  accordance  with  fair,  just  and  reasonable
procedure  established  by  valid  law.  There  are  several  other
indications,  also,  in  the  Constitution  which  show  that  the
Constitution-makers were fully cognizant of the existence of death
penalty for murder and certain other offences in the Penal Code,
871860.  Entries 1 and 2  in List  III  — Concurrent  List — of the
Seventh Schedule, specifically refer to the Penal Code, 1860 and
the Code of Criminal Procedure as in force at the commencement
of  the  Constitution.  Article  72(1)( c)  specifically  invests  the
President with power to suspend, remit or commute the sentence
of any person convicted of any offence, and also “in all cases
where  the  sentence  is  a  sentence  of  death”.  Likewise,  under
Article 161, the Governor of a State has been given power to
suspend, remit or commute, inter alia, the sentence of death of
any person convicted of murder or other capital offence relating to
a matter to which the executive power of the State extends. Article
134, in terms, gives a right of appeal to the Supreme Court to a
person who, on appeal, is sentenced to death by the High Court,
after  reversal  of  his  acquittal  by  the  trial  court.  Under  the
successive Criminal Procedure Codes which have been in force
for about 100 years, a sentence of death is to be carried out by
hanging. In view of the aforesaid constitutional postulates, by no
stretch  of  imagination  can  it  be said that  death penalty  under
Section 302 of the Penal Code, either per se or because of its
execution  by  hanging,  constitutes  an  unreasonable,  cruel  or
unusual  punishment.  By  reason  of  the  same  constitutional
postulates, it cannot be said that the framers of the Constitution
considered death sentence for murder or the prescribed traditional
mode of its execution as a degrading punishment which would
defile “the dignity of the individual” within the contemplation of the
preamble to the Constitution. On parity of reasoning, it cannot be
said that death penalty for the offence of murder violates the basic
structure of the Constitution.”
44.3.2.In  relation  to  the  second  question,  the  Court  examined  the
development  of  law, particularly  the  change  of  legislative  policy  with
introduction  of  Section  354(3)  CrPC  as  also  the  Law  Commission’s
reports and various past decisions; and summarised the propositions laid
down in Jagmohan  (supra) in the following terms: -
“160. In the light of the above conspectus, we will now consider
the effect of the aforesaid legislative changes on the authority and
efficacy of the propositions laid down by this Court in  Jagmohan
case. These propositions may be summed up as under:
(i) The general legislative policy that underlines the structure of
our criminal law, principally contained in the Indian Penal Code
and the Criminal Procedure Code, is to define an offence with
sufficient clarity and to prescribe only the maximum punishment
88therefor, and to allow a very wide discretion to the Judge in the
matter of fixing the degree of punishment.
With the solitary exception of Section 303, the same policy
permeates  Section 302 and  some other sections  of the  Penal
Code, where the maximum punishment is the death penalty.
(ii) (a) No exhaustive enumeration of aggravating or mitigating
circumstances which should be considered when sentencing an
offender, is possible. “The infinite variety of cases and facets to
each  case  would  make  general  standards  either  meaningless
‘boiler plate’ or a statement of the obvious that no Jury (Judge)
would need.” (referred to  McGoutha v. California: (1971) 402 US
183)
     (b) The impossibility of laying down standards is at the very
core of the criminal law as administered in India which invests the
Judges  with  a  very  wide  discretion  in  the  matter  of  fixing  the
degree of punishment.
(iii) The view taken by the plurality in  Furman v. Georgia: (1976)
1 SCC 425,  decided by the Supreme Court of the United States, to
the  effect,  that  a  law  which  gives  uncontrolled  and  unguided
discretion to the Jury (or the Judge) to choose arbitrarily between
a  sentence  of  death  and  imprisonment  for  a  capital  offence,
violates the Eighth Amendment, is not applicable in India. We do
not  have  in  our  Constitution  any  provision  like  the  Eighth
Amendment,  nor  are  we  at  liberty  to  apply  the  test  of
reasonableness with the freedom with which the Judges of the
Supreme  Court  of  America  are  accustomed  to  apply  “the  due
process” clause. There are grave doubts about the expediency of
transplanting western experience in our country. Social conditions
are different and so also the general intellectual level. Arguments
which would be valid in respect of one area of the world may not
hold good in respect of another area.
(iv)  (a)  This  discretion  in  the  matter  of  sentence  is  to  be
exercised  by  the  Judge  judicially,  after  balancing  all  the
aggravating and mitigating circumstances of the crime.
      (b) The discretion is liable to be corrected by superior
courts.  The  exercise  of  judicial  discretion  on  well  recognised
principles is, in the final analysis, the safest possible safeguard for
the accused.
In view of the above, it will be impossible to say that there
would  be  at  all  any  discrimination,  since  crime  as  crime  may
appear  to  be  superficially  the  same  but  the  facts  and
circumstances of a crime are widely different. Thus considered,
the provision in Section 302, Penal Code is not violative of Article
14 of the Constitution on the ground that it confers on the Judges
an unguided and uncontrolled discretion in the matter of awarding
capital punishment or imprisonment for life.
(v)  (a)  Relevant  facts  and  circumstances  impinging  on  the
nature and circumstances of the crime can be brought before the
89court at the pre-conviction stage, notwithstanding the fact that no
formal procedure for producing evidence regarding such facts and
circumstances  had  been  specifically  provided.  Where  counsel
addresses the court with regard to the character and standing of
the accused, they are duly considered by the court unless there is
something in the evidence itself which belies him or the Public
Prosecutor challenges the facts.
     (b) It is to be emphasised that in exercising its discretion to
choose either of the two alternative sentences provided in Section
302 Penal Code, “the court is  principally concerned with the facts
and circumstances whether aggravating or mitigating, which are
connected with the particular crime under inquiry. All such facts
and circumstances are capable of being proved in accordance
with the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act in a trial regulated
by  the  CrPC.  The  trial does not  come to an end  until all  the
relevant facts are proved and the counsel on both sides have an
opportunity to address the court. The only thing that remains is for
the Judge to decide on the guilt and punishment and that is what
Sections 306 (2) and 309 (2), CrPC purport to provide for. These
provisions are part of the procedure established by law and unless
it is shown that they are invalid for any other reasons they must be
regarded as valid. No reasons are offered to show that they are
constitutionally  invalid  and  hence  the  death  sentence  imposed
after trial in accordance with the procedure established by law is
not  unconstitutional  under  Article  21”.  (SCC  p.  36),  (emphasis
added)”
44.3.3. The  Court,  thereafter,  observed  that  the  authority  of  the
propositions aforesaid had not been affected by the legislative changes
but  two  of  the  propositions,  at  No.  (iv)(a) and  (v)(b),  would  require
modulation  in  terms  of  the  changed  legislative  policy  delineated  in
Sections 354(3) and 235(2) CrPC. Thus, while otherwise reaffirming the
view taken in Jagmohan (supra) the Court held and laid down as under: -
“164. Attuned to the legislative policy delineated in Sections 354(3)
and 235(2), propositions (iv)(a) and (v)(b) in Jagmohan shall have
to be recast and may be stated as below:
(a) The normal rule is that the offence of murder shall
be punished with the sentence of life imprisonment. The
court  can  depart  from  that  rule  and  impose  the
sentence of death only if there are special reasons for
doing so. Such reasons must be recorded in writing
before imposing the death sentence.
90(b) While considering the question of sentence to be
imposed for the offence of murder under Section 302 of
the Penal Code,  the court must have regard to every
relevant circumstance relating to the crime as well as
the criminal. If the court finds, but not otherwise, that
the offence is of an exceptionally depraved and heinous
character and constitutes, on account of its design and
the manner of its execution, a source of grave danger to
the society at large, the court may impose the death
sentence.
165. The  soundness  or  application  of  the  other  propositions
in Jagmohan,  and  the  premises  on  which  they  rest,  are  not
affected in any way by the legislative changes since effected. On
the  contrary,  these  changes  reinforce  the  reasons  given
in Jagmohan,  for  holding  that  the  impugned  provisions  of  the
Penal  Code  and  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  do  not  offend
Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. Now, Parliament has in
Section 354 (3) given a broad and clear guide-line which is to
serve the purpose of lodestar to the court in the exercise of its
sentencing discretion. Parliament has advisedly not restricted this
sentencing discretion further, as, in its legislative judgment, it is
neither possible nor desirable to do so. Parliament could not but
be aware that since the Amending Act 26 of 1955, death penalty
has been imposed by courts on an extremely small percentage of
persons convicted of murder — a fact which demonstrates that
courts have generally exercised their discretion in inflicting this
extreme penalty with great circumspection, caution and restraint.
Cognizant of the past experience of the administration of death
penalty in India, Parliament, in its wisdom, thought it best and safe
to leave the imposition of this gravest punishment in gravest cases
of murder, to the judicial discretion of the courts which are manned
by persons of reason, experience and standing in the profession.
The exercise of this sentencing discretion cannot be said to be
untrammelled  and  unguided.  It  is  exercised  judicially  in
accordance with well recognised principles crystallised by judicial
decisions, directed along the broad contours of legislative policy
towards the signposts enacted in Section 354(3).
166. The new Section 235(2) adds to the number of several other
safeguards which were embodied in the Criminal Procedure Code
of 1898 and have been re-enacted in the Code of 1973. Then, the
errors in the exercise of this guided judicial discretion are liable to
be corrected by the superior courts. The procedure provided in
Criminal  Procedure  Code  for  imposing  capital  punishment  for
murder  and  some  other  capital  crimes  under  the  Penal  Code
cannot, by any reckoning, be said to be unfair, unreasonable and
unjust.  Nor can  it be said  that  this sentencing discretion, with
which the courts are invested, amounts to delegation of its power
of legislation by Parliament. The argument to that effect is entirely
misconceived. We would, therefore, reaffirm the view taken by this
91Court in     Jagmohan  , and hold that the impugned provisions do not
violate Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution .”
(emphasis supplied)
44.3.4.The  Court  also  stated  that  ‘special  reasons'  in  the  context  of
Section  354(3)  CrPC  would  obviously  mean  ‘exceptional  reasons’,
meaning thereby, that the extreme penalty should be imposed only in
extreme cases in the following terms: -
“161. .…The expression “special reasons” in the context of this
provision, obviously means “exceptional reasons”  founded on the
exceptionally grave circumstances of the particular case relating to
the crime as well as the criminal. Thus, the legislative policy now
writ  large  and  clear  on  the  face  of  Section  354(3)  is  that  on
conviction for murder and other capital offences punishable in the
alternative with death under the Penal Code , the extreme penalty
should be imposed only in extreme cases. ”
(emphasis supplied)
44.3.5.After taking  note  of  various  circumstances  projected  before  it,
which could be of mitigating factors, and while observing that the scope
and  concept  of  mitigating  factors  in  the  area  of  death  penalty  must
receive  a liberal  and  expansive  construction,  the  Court  proceeded  to
uphold  the  constitutional  validity  of  Section  354(3)  CrPC,  with  the
observations that the legislature had explicitly prioritised life imprisonment
as the normal punishment and death penalty as being of exception, and
with enunciation of rarest of rare doctrine in the following words: -
“209.....It is, therefore, imperative to voice the concern that courts,
aided by the  broad  illustrative  guide-lines indicated  by us,  will
discharge the onerous function with evermore scrupulous care and
humane concern, directed along the highroad of legislative policy
outlined  in  Section  354(3),  viz.,  that  for  persons  convicted  of
murder,  life  imprisonment  is  the  rule  and  death  sentence  an
exception. A real and abiding concern for the dignity of human life
postulates resistance to taking a life through law's instrumentality.
That ought not to be done save in the rarest of rare cases when
the alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed .”
92(emphasis supplied)
44.4.In  fact,  Bachan  Singh  (supra)  judgment  has  been  succinctly
summarised and its principles explained by another Constitution Bench of
this Court in the case of Mithu v. State of Punjab : (1983) 2 SCC 277
while dealing with the question of constitutional validity of Section 303
IPC, which provided for death sentence as the mandatory punishment for
a  person  who,  being  under  sentence  of  imprisonment  for  life,  would
commit murder. In the course of declaring the said provision contained in
Section 303 IPC constitutionally invalid, the Constitution Bench dealt with
a large number of arguments; and one of them had been that the validity
of death sentence had already been upheld in  Bachan Singh  (supra)
and, therefore, such questions should not be allowed to raise their head
over  again.  While  pointing  out  the  fallacy  of  this  argument,  the
Constitution Bench explained as to what exactly had been the ratio of
Bachan Singh in the following words: -
“7.….The majority did not lay down any abstract proposition in
Bachan Singh  that "death sentence is Constitutional", that is to
say, that "It is permissible under the Constitution to provide for the
sentence of death". To be exact, the question which arose for the
consideration  of  the  Court  was  not  whether,  under  the
Constitution, it is permissible to provide for the sentence of death.
The  precise  question  which  arose  in  that  case  was  whether
Section 302  of the Penal Code which provides for the sentence of
death as one of the two alternative sentences is valid. It may be
recalled that Section 302  provides for the sentence of death as an
alternative sentence which may be imposed. The normal sentence
for murder is life imprisonment; and if the death sentence has to
be imposed, the Court is under a legal obligation under Section
354(3) of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  to  state  the  special
reasons for imposing that sentence. That explains why, in Bachan
Singh, Sarkaria J., who spoke for the majority, underscored the
words "alternative" and "may" in paragraph 19 of the judgment,
93whilst  observing  that  prescribes  death  as  an  alternative
punishment  to which the offender may be sentenced in cases
relating to seven kinds of offences. The majority concluded that        of
the Penal Code is valid for three main reasons: Firstly, that the
death sentence provided for by Section 302     is an alternative to the
sentence of life imprisonment, secondly, that special reasons have
to be stated if the normal rule is departed from and the death
sentence has to be imposed; and, thirdly, because the accused is
entitled, under Section 235(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
to be heard on the question of sentence.  The last of these three
reasons  becomes  relevant,  only  because  of  the  first  of  these
reasons. In other words, it is because the Court has an option to
impose either of the two alternative sentences, subject to the rule
that the normal punishment for murder is life imprisonment, that it
is  important  to  hear  the  accused  on  the  question  of
sentence…. The ratio of    Bachan Singh  , therefore, is that, death
sentence  is  Constitutional  if  it  is  prescribed  as  an  alternative
sentence for the offence of murder    and   if the normal sentence
prescribed by law for murder is imprisonment for life ….”
(emphasis supplied)
44.5.Thereafter, in  Machhi Singh  (supra), a 3-Judge Bench of this
Court, while considering a case where the appellant was convicted of
orchestrating and executing a conspiracy, which resulted in the murder of
as many as 17 people due to a family feud, explained the philosophy
pertaining to the death sentence in the following words: -
“32. …Every  member  of  the  community  owes  a  debt  to  the
community for this protection. When ingratitude is shown instead
of gratitude by “killing” a member of the community which protects
the murderer himself from being killed, or when the community
feels that for the sake of self-preservation the killer has to be
killed,  the  community  may  well  withdraw  the  protection  by
sanctioning the death penalty. But the community will not do so in
every  case.  It  may  do  so  “in  rarest  of  rare  cases”  when  its
collective conscience is so shocked that it will expect the holders
of the judicial power centre to inflict death penalty irrespective of
their  personal  opinion  as  regards  desirability  or  otherwise  of
retaining  death  penalty. The  community  may  entertain  such  a
sentiment  when  the  crime  is  viewed  from  the  platform  of  the
motive for, or the manner of commission of the crime.…”
(emphasis supplied)
9444.5.1.The Court also explained the relevant propositions of  Bachan
Singh (supra) and the pertinent queries for applying those propositions in
the following terms: -
“38. In this background the guidelines indicated in Bachan Singh
case will have to be culled out and applied to the facts of each
individual case where the question of imposing of death sentence
arises.  The  following  propositions  emerge  from  Bachan  Singh
case:
(i)The extreme penalty of death need not be inflicted except in
gravest cases of extreme culpability.
(ii)Before opting for the death penalty the circumstances of the
‘offender’ also require to be taken into consideration along with the
circumstances of the ‘crime’.
(iii)Life  imprisonment  is  the  rule  and  death  sentence  is  an
exception. In other words death sentence must be imposed only
when life imprisonment appears to be an altogether inadequate
punishment having regard to the relevant circumstances of the
crime,  and  provided,  and  only  provided,  the  option  to  impose
sentence  of  imprisonment  for  life  cannot  be  conscientiously
exercised having regard to the nature and circumstances of the
crime and all the relevant circumstances.
(iv)A balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances
has to be drawn up and in doing so the mitigating circumstances
have to be accorded full weightage and a just balance has to be
struck between the aggravating and the mitigating circumstances
before the option is exercised.
39.  In order to apply these guidelines inter alia the following
questions may be asked and answered:
(a)Is there something uncommon about the crime which renders
sentence of imprisonment for life inadequate and calls for a death
sentence?
(b)Are  the  circumstances  of  the  crime  such  that  there  is  no
alternative but  to  impose  death  sentence  even  after  according
maximum weightage to the mitigating circumstances which speak
in favour of the offender?
40.    If upon taking an overall global view of all the circumstances
in the light of the aforesaid proposition and taking into account the
answers to the questions posed hereinabove, the circumstances
of the case are such that death sentence is warranted, the court
would proceed to do so .”
(emphasis supplied)
9544.6. Another relevant decision to be noticed is that in the case of
Swamy Shraddananda (2) (supra). The said decision was rendered by a
3-Judge Bench of this Court in the backdrop that though a 2-Judge Bench
of this Court upheld the conviction of the appellant of offences under
Sections 302 and 201 IPC but, one of the learned Judges felt that in the
facts and circumstances of the case, punishment of imprisonment till the
end of the natural life of the convict would serve the ends of justice,
whereas the other learned Judge was of the view that the appellant was
liable to the punishment of death. In keeping with the ever-progressing
canons of penology, the 3-Judge Bench carved out a different course,
being of not awarding death penalty but, of conditioning the sentence of
imprisonment for life with a rider that the convict shall not be released
from the prison for the rest of his life. The Court explained the logic of
such  sentencing,  which  overrides  the  availability  of  remission,  in  the
following terms: -
“92. The matter may be looked at from a slightly different angle.
The issue of sentencing has two aspects. A sentence may be
excessive and unduly harsh or it may be highly disproportionately
inadequate. When an appellant comes to this Court carrying a
death sentence awarded by the trial court and confirmed by the
High Court, this Court may find, as in the present appeal, that the
case just falls short of the rarest of the rare category and may feel
somewhat reluctant in endorsing the death sentence. But at the
same time, having regard to the nature of the crime, the Court may
strongly  feel  that  a  sentence  of  life  imprisonment  subject  to
remission normally works out  to a term of 14 years would be
grossly disproportionate and inadequate. What then should the
Court do? If the Court's option is limited only to two punishments,
one a sentence of imprisonment, for all intents and purposes, of
not more than 14 years and the other death, the Court may feel
tempted and find itself nudged into endorsing the death penalty.
Such  a  course  would  indeed  be  disastrous.  A  far  more  just,
96reasonable and proper course would be to expand the options and
to take over what, as a matter of fact, lawfully belongs to the Court
i.e. the vast hiatus between 14 years' imprisonment and death . It
needs to be emphasised that the Court would take recourse to the
expanded option primarily because in the facts of the case, the
sentence  of  14  years'  imprisonment  would  amount  to  no
punishment at all.
93.  Further, the formalisation of a special category of sentence,
though for an extremely few number of cases, shall have the great
advantage of having the death penalty on the statute book but to
actually use it as little as possible, really in the rarest of rare
cases. This would only be a reassertion of the Constitution Bench
decision in Bachan Singh  besides being in accord with the modern
trends in penology.”
(emphasis supplied)
44.7.We need not elongate this discussion by assembling various other
decisions rendered in variegated circumstances and factual matrices but
deem  it appropriate  to  refer  to  the decision  in  the case of  Shankar
Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra : (2013) 5 SCC 546 , wherein
this Court surveyed a large number of cases on either side that is, where
death sentence was upheld/awarded or where it was commuted; and
pointed out the  requirement of applying ‘crime test’,  ‘criminal test’ and
‘rarest  of rare  test’. This  Court  recounted, with  reference  to  previous
decisions, the aggravating circumstances (crime test) and the  mitigating
circumstances (criminal  test) as follows:  -
49. In Bachan Singh  and Machhi Singh  cases, this Court laid down
various principles for awarding sentence: ( Rajendra Pralhadrao
case, SCC pp. 47-48, para 33)
“‘Aggravating circumstances — (Crime test)
(1) The offences relating to the commission of heinous crimes like
murder, rape, armed dacoity, kidnapping, etc. by the accused with
a prior record of conviction for capital felony or offences committed
by the person having a substantial history of serious assaults and
criminal convictions.
(2) The offence was committed while the offender was engaged in
the commission of another serious offence.
97(3) The offence was committed with the intention to create a fear
psychosis in the public at large and was committed in a public
place by a weapon or device which clearly could be hazardous to
the life of more than one person.
(4)  The  offence  of  murder  was  committed  for  ransom  or  like
offences to receive money or monetary benefits.
(5) Hired killings.
(6) The offence was committed outrageously for want only while
involving inhumane treatment and torture to the victim.
(7)  The  offence  was  committed  by  a  person  while  in  lawful
custody.
(8) The murder or the offence was committed to prevent a person
lawfully carrying out his duty like arrest or custody in a place of
lawful confinement of himself or another. For instance, murder is of
a person who had acted in lawful discharge of his duty under
Section 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(9)  When the  crime is  enormous in proportion  like  making an
attempt of murder of the entire family or members of a particular
community.
(10) When the victim is innocent, helpless or a person relies upon
the trust of relationship and social norms, like a child, helpless
woman, a daughter or a niece staying with a father/uncle and is
inflicted with the crime by such a trusted person.
(11) When murder is committed for a motive which evidences total
depravity and meanness.
(12) When there is a cold-blooded murder without provocation.
(13) The crime is committed so brutally that it pricks or shocks not
only the judicial conscience but even the conscience of the society.
Mitigating circumstances — (Criminal test)
(1) The manner and circumstances in and under which the offence
was  committed,  for  example,  extreme  mental  or  emotional
disturbance or extreme provocation in contradistinction to all these
situations in normal course.
(2) The age of the accused is a relevant consideration but not a
determinative factor by itself.
(3) The chances of the accused of not indulging in commission of
the crime again and the probability of the accused being reformed
and rehabilitated.
(4)  The  condition  of  the accused shows  that he was mentally
defective and the defect impaired his capacity to appreciate the
circumstances of his criminal conduct.
(5)  The  circumstances  which,  in  normal  course  of  life,  would
render such a behaviour possible and could have the effect of
giving  rise  to  mental  imbalance  in  that  given  situation  like
persistent harassment or, in fact, leading to such a peak of human
behaviour that, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the
accused believed that he was morally justified in committing the
offence.
98(6) Where the court upon proper appreciation of evidence is of the
view that the crime was not committed in a preordained manner
and that the death resulted in the course of commission of another
crime and that there was a possibility of it being construed as
consequences to the commission of the primary crime.
(7) Where it is absolutely unsafe to rely upon the testimony of a
sole eyewitness though the prosecution has brought home the
guilt of the accused.”
This Court further said: -
“52. Aggravating circumstances as pointed out above, of course,
are not exhaustive so also the mitigating circumstances. In my
considered view, the tests that we have to apply, while awarding
death sentence are “crime test”, “criminal test” and the “R-R test”
and not the “balancing test”. To award death sentence, the “crime
test” has to be fully satisfied, that is, 100% and “criminal test” 0%,
that is, no mitigating circumstance favouring the accused. If there
is any circumstance favouring the accused, like lack of intention to
commit  the  crime,  possibility  of  reformation,  young  age  of  the
accused, not a menace to the society, no previous track record,
etc. the “criminal test” may favour the accused to avoid the capital
punishment.  Even  if  both  the  tests  are  satisfied,  that  is,  the
aggravating circumstances to the fullest extent and no mitigating
circumstances favouring the accused, still we have to apply finally
the rarest of the rare case test (R-R test). R-R test depends upon
the  perception  of  the  society  that  is  “society-centric”  and  not
“Judge-centric”,  that  is,  whether  the  society  will  approve  the
awarding  of death  sentence to  certain types  of  crimes  or  not.
While applying that test, the court has to look into variety of factors
like society's abhorrence,   extreme indignation and antipathy to
certain  types  of  crimes  like  sexual  assault  and  murder  of
intellectually challenged minor girls, suffering from physical
disability  ,  old  and  infirm  women  with  those  disabilities,  etc.
Examples  are  only  illustrative  and  not  exhaustive.  The  courts
award  death  sentence  since  situation  demands  so,  due  to
constitutional compulsion, reflected by the will of the people  and
not the will of the Judges.”
(emphasis and extra emphasis supplied)
44.8.It is also noteworthy that the said proposition of special category of
sentencing  by  way  of  life  imprisonment  sans  remission  was  again  a
matter of debate and led to a reference to the Constitution Bench, which
came to be answered in the case of   Union of India v. V. Sriharan
99Alias Murugan  and Ors.: (2016) 7 SCC 1. There had been several
questions referred to the Constitution Bench as regards the powers of
remission, but all those aspects need not be dilated herein. The aspect
relevant  for  the  present  purpose  is  that  a  majority  of  three  Judges
approved the ratio in  Swamy Shraddananda (2)  (supra) providing for
special category of life sentence without remission. Though the minority
opinion concurred that imprisonment for life in terms of Section 52 read
with Section 45 IPC only meant imprisonment for the rest of the life of the
convict, where the right to claim remission, commutation etc. as provided
under Article 72 or 161 of the Constitution of India would always be
available  but,  did  not  concur  with  other  part  of  the  majority  opinion
approving the aforesaid special category sentence with the reasoning that
such  a  course  of  providing  mandatory  period  of  actual  imprisonment
would be inconsistent with Section 433-A CrPC. The majority view, being
the declaration of law by this Court, could be usefully noticed from the
relevant question and its answer as follows: -
“Question  52.1:  Whether  imprisonment  for  life  in  terms  of
Section 53 read with Section 45 of the Penal Code meant
imprisonment for rest of the life of the prisoner or a convict
undergoing life imprisonment has a right to claim remission
and whether as per the principles enunciated in paras 91 to
93  of  Swamy  Shraddananda  (2),  a  special  category  of
sentence  may  be  made  for  the  very  few  cases  where  the
death  penalty  might  be  substituted  by  the  punishment  of
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term in excess of
fourteen years and to put that category beyond application of
remission?
Answer
177.  Imprisonment for life in terms of Section 53 read with Section
45 of the Penal Code only means imprisonment for the rest of the
life  of  the  convict.  The  right  to  claim  remission,  commutation,
100reprieve, etc. as provided under Article 72 or Article 161 of the
Constitution will always be available being constitutional remedies
untouchable by the Court.
178.  We hold that the ratio laid down in Swamy Shraddananda (2)
that  a  special  category  of  sentence;  instead  of  death  can  be
substituted by the punishment of imprisonment for life or for a term
exceeding 14 years and put that category beyond application of
remission is well founded and we answer the said question in the
affirmative.”
44.9.Before proceeding further, we may observe that with development
of  the  law  on  sentencing  procedure  in  accord  with  the  decisions
aforesaid, one of the elements of mitigating factors namely, probability of
reformation of the convict and his rehabilitation and reintegration into the
mainstream  society,  has  been  given  due  consideration,  rather  extra
weightage,  as  highlighted  by  various  decisions  of  this  Court.  As  an
example, we may refer to the decision in Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik
v. State of Maharashtra : (2019) 12 SCC 460 , wherein the appellant was
convicted of offences under Section 376(2)(f), 377 and 302 IPC for rape
and murder of a three-year-old girl on the basis of circumstantial evidence
and  was  sentenced  to  death.  Though  his  appeal  to  this  Court  was
dismissed and review petition was also dismissed but, his review petition
was later on reopened and heard by a 3-Judge Bench. This Court held
that there was no hard and fast rule that death sentence could not be
awarded  if  conviction  was  based  on  circumstantial  evidence,  but
proceeded to commute death sentence into that of life imprisonment after
finding that the Trial Court and the High Court did not consider various
101factors including the probability of the petitioner to be reformed. This
Court, inter alia, held as under: -
 “45. The law laid down by various decisions of this Court clearly
and unequivocally mandates that the probability (not possibility or
improbability or impossibility) that a convict can be reformed and
rehabilitated in society must be seriously and earnestly considered
by the courts before awarding the death sentence. This is one of
the  mandates  of  the  “special  reasons”  requirement  of  Section
354(3) CrPC and ought not to be taken lightly since it involves
snuffing out the life of a person. To effectuate this mandate, it is
the obligation on the prosecution to prove to the court, through
evidence,  that  the  probability  is  that  the  convict  cannot  be
reformed or rehabilitated. This can be achieved by bringing on
record, inter alia, material about his conduct in jail, his conduct
outside jail if he has been on bail for some time, medical evidence
about  his mental make-up,  contact  with  his  family and so  on.
Similarly, the convict can produce evidence on these issues as
well.
*** *** ***
47. Consideration  of  the  reformation,  rehabilitation  and
reintegration  of  the  convict  into  society  cannot  be
overemphasised.  Until Bachan Singh, the emphasis given by the
courts was primarily on the nature of the crime, its brutality and
severity. Bachan  Singh  placed  the  sentencing  process  into
perspective  and  introduced  the  necessity  of  considering  the
reformation  or  rehabilitation  of  the  convict.  Despite  the  view
expressed by the Constitution Bench, there have been several
instances… where there is a tendency to give primacy to the crime
and consider the criminal in a somewhat secondary manner. As
observed in Sangeet16 “In the sentencing process, both the crime
and the criminal are equally important.” Therefore, we should not
forget  that  the  criminal,  however  ruthless  he  might  be,  is
nevertheless a human being and is entitled to a life of dignity
notwithstanding his crime. Therefore, it is for the prosecution and
the courts to determine whether such a person, notwithstanding
his  crime,  can  be  reformed  and  rehabilitated.  To  obtain  and
analyse this information is certainly not an easy task but must
nevertheless be undertaken. The process of rehabilitation is also
not a simple one since it involves social reintegration of the convict
into  society. Of  course,  notwithstanding  any  information  made
available and its analysis by experts coupled with the evidence on
record, there could be instances where the social reintegration of
the convict may not be possible. If that should happen, the option
of a long duration of imprisonment is permissible.”
16 Sangeet and Anr. v. State of Haryana : (2013) 2 SCC 452 . 
10245.Learned counsel for the appellant has cited a few decisions with
the submissions that in these cases, the death sentence was altered to
other  sentence  by this  Court  while applying  the  principle  of  ‘residual
doubt’.  Though  it is noticed that  the  cited  decisions  did not as  such
proceed on the theory of ‘residual doubt’ but, we may take note of the
relevant features of the cited decisions. It may, however, be observed that
the contentions relating to the theory of ‘residual doubt’ shall be adverted
to a little later.
45.1.In the case of  Viran Gyanlal Rajput  (supra), the accused was
convicted of the offences under Sections 302, 201 IPC and Sections 10
and 14 POCSO, for kidnapping, rape and murder of a 13-year-old girl and
causing disappearance of evidence, and he was awarded death sentence
for  the  offence  under  Section  302  IPC.  The  case  was  based  on
circumstantial evidence, with the incriminating circumstances operating
against the appellant being that he was last seen with the deceased while
she was walking home from school; he was later seen running alone in
the evening; the dead body and the incriminating articles like clothes of
the  victim  were  recovered  at  his  instance;  mud  stains  on  his  pants
matched the mud stains seized from the spot; his failure to explain the
injuries found on his person; medical evidence showing that the victim
had been forcibly raped and killed; hiding the dead body to suppress
evidence; and failure of the appellant to offer a plausible explanation for
the  incriminating  circumstances  against  him.  While  confirming  the
103conviction  of  the  appellant  under  other  provisions  as  also  the  death
sentence, the High Court set aside the conviction of the appellant under
Section 10 POCSO. As regards death sentence, this Court reiterated the
principle that life imprisonment was the rule and death sentence was the
exception, which was to be imposed only when the alternative of life
imprisonment had been unquestionably foreclosed. This Court found that
even though the crime committed by the appellant was abominable, it
could not be held to be falling within the ‘rarest of rare’. This Court also
found that the prosecution had been unable to prove that the appellant
could not be reformed and thus, commuted the sentence of death into
that of imprisonment for life without scope of remission for 20 years.
These findings of this Court could be usefully reproduced as under: -
“25. Though  we  agree  that  the  crime  committed  is  of  an
abominable  nature,  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  of  such  a  brutal,
depraved,  heinous  or  diabolical  nature  so  as  to  fall  into  the
category of the rarest of rare cases and invite punishment with
death. We also find ourselves unable to agree with the view of the
courts that the appellant  is such a menace to society that he
cannot be allowed to stay alive. On the other hand, we are of the
view that the prosecution did not establish that the appellant was
beyond  reform,  especially  given  his  young  age.  We  are  also
mindful of the appellant's lack of criminal antecedents prior to the
commission of this crime, and of his post-incarceration conduct,
which in no way suggests the impossibility of his reform. It would
be pertinent to observe at this point that although the trial court
noted his lack of remorse during the hearing, and the High Court
noted his lack of remorse after committing the crime, as he was
found calmly wandering around the locality, this does not in any
way indicate that there is no scope of reform for the appellant.
26. Thus,  neither  the  circumstances  of  the  crime  nor  the
circumstances of the criminal i.e. the appellant, would go to show
that the instant matter falls into the category of the rarest of rare
cases, or that the sentence of life imprisonment is unquestionably
foreclosed and grossly disproportionate. Therefore, in the totality
104of  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  this  case,  we  find  it  fit  to
commute the death sentence of the appellant to life imprisonment.
27. At the same time, we are of the opinion that a sentence of life
imprisonment simpliciter would not be proportionate to the gravity
of the offence committed, and would not meet the need to respond
to  crimes  against  women  and  children  in  the  most  stringent
manner possible. Moreover, though we have noticed above that
the  possibility  of  reform  of  the  accused  is  not  completely
precluded, we nevertheless share the concerns of the trial court
and the High Court regarding the lack of remorse on behalf of the
appellant and the possibility of reoffending. In such a situation, we
deem it fit to restrict the right of the appellant to claim remission in
his sentence of life imprisonment for a period of 20 years.”
45.2.In the case of Babasaheb Maruti Kamble (supra), the appellant
was convicted of offences under Sections 302, 376(2)(f) and 342 IPC and
was awarded death sentence for the offence punishable under Section
302 IPC. The said case also rested on circumstantial evidence which
included the circumstances that the deceased girl was last seen with the
appellant; the dead body of the victim girl was found in his house and
under  his  bed;  and  slippers  and  clothes  of  the  victim  girl  were  also
recovered from his house along with bloodstained chadar; DNA and post-
mortem examination report corroborated the prosecution case. Having
found the conviction not calling for any interference, this Court took into
account the factors that the appellant had reached the age of 60 years,
had  no  criminal  antecedents,  there  was  likelihood  of  reform  and  the
respondent-State could not point out any blameworthy conduct by him in
jail. Thus, this Court commuted the death sentence into that of life with a
cap of 20 years’ imprisonment without remission. 
45.3.In  the  case  of  Nand  Kishore  (supra),  the  accused-appellant,
about 50 years of age, was convicted of the offences under Sections 302,
105363, 366 and 376(2)(i) IPC for kidnapping, rape and murder of an 8-year-
old girl. The case was based on circumstantial evidence where PW-4,
brother of the deceased girl, identified the appellant in Test Identification
Parade  and  categorically  stated  that  the  appellant  took  away  the
deceased from mela. The last seen evidence was corroborated by PW-7.
This Court upheld the conviction. As regards the question of sentence,
where the appellant had been sentenced to death, this Court referred,
inter alia, to the enunciation in  Swamy Shraddananda (2)  (supra) and
observed that the appellant was having no criminal antecedents and was
coming from a poor socio-economic background, where the local Bar
Association refused to represent the appellant and he was provided legal
aid only on the day of framing of charge. This Court also found that there
was no finding recorded by the Courts below that the appellant could not
be reformed. In the overall circumstances, this Court commuted death
sentence into life imprisonment with actual period of 25 years without any
benefit of remission in the following: -
“15. …So far as the present case is concerned, it solely rests on
circumstantial evidence. It is the specific case of the appellant that
he was denied the proper legal assistance in the matter and he is
a  manhole  worker.  The  appellant  was  aged  about  50  years.
Further, in this case there is no finding recorded by the courts
below to the effect that there is no possibility of reformation of the
appellant. We are of the view that the reasons assigned by the trial
court as confirmed by the High Court, do not constitute special
reasons within the meaning of Section 354(3) CrPC to impose
death penalty on the accused.
16. Taking into account the evidence on record and the totality of
the circumstances of the case, and by applying the test on the
touchstone of case law discussed above, we are of the view that
the case on hand will not fall within the “rarest of rare” cases. In
106that view of the matter, we are of the view that the death sentence
imposed  by  the  trial  court,  as  confirmed  by  the  High  Court,
requires modification. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed in part;
while confirming the conviction,  recorded  by  the trial  court,  as
confirmed by the appellate court, we modify the sentence to that of
life  imprisonment  with  actual  period  of  25  years,  without  any
benefit  of  remission.  It  is  further  made  clear  that  sentences
imposed for all offences shall run concurrently.”
45.4.The decision in the case of  Sakru Mahagu Binjewar (supra) does
not have any factual correlation with the case at hand except that therein,
this Court referred to the principles in Bachan Singh  and Machhi Singh
(supra) while pointing out that the same have been consistently followed
by Courts depending on the facts and circumstances of each case as also
that  this  Court  has  referred  to  the  principles  evolved  in  Swamy
Shraddananda (2) (supra), as approved by the Constitution Bench in V.
Sriharan (supra). In that case, the High Court, while upholding conviction
under  Section  302  IPC  based  on  the  evidence  of  eye-witnesses,
commuted the death sentence awarded to some of the accused persons,
inter  alia,  for  the  reasons  that  the  accused  felt  they  were  falsely
implicated in a criminal case; and that there was no evidence to suggest
that the accused had a criminal record. In the given set of facts and
circumstances, this Court found no ground to interfere with the judgments
under appeal.
46.Yet further, a few other decisions, relied upon by learned counsel
for  the  respondent-State  in  support  of  his  arguments  could  also  be
noticed as follows:
10746.1.Kamta Tiwari  (supra) was a case of rape followed by murder of a
7-year-old girl by a person who was close to the family of the victim and
the victim used to call him “Tiwari uncle”. The girl was kidnapped by the
accused; was subjected to rape; was strangulated to death; and then, the
dead body was thrown into the well. The enormity of crime coupled with
the  misuse  of  trust  weighed  with  this  Court  in  confirming  the  death
sentence.
46.2.In  Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar  (supra), this Court
extensively dealt with three broad values emerging from Bachan Singh
(supra), that is, individualised sentencing, threshold of rarest of rare, and
principled sentencing and said, inter alia, as under: -
“131. When the court is faced with a capital sentencing case, a
comparative analysis of the case before it with other purportedly
similar  cases  would  be  in  the  fitness  of  the  scheme  of  the
Constitution.  Comparison  will  presuppose  an  identification  of  a
pool of equivalently circumstanced capital defendants. The gravity,
nature and motive relating to crime will play a role in this analysis.
132. Next step would be to deal with the subjectivity involved in
capital cases. The imprecision of the identification of aggravating
and mitigating circumstances has to be minimised. It is to be noted
that  the  mandate  of  equality  clause  applies  to  the  sentencing
process rather than the outcome. The comparative review must be
undertaken not to channel the sentencing discretion available to
the courts but to bring in consistency in identification of various
relevant  circumstances.  The  aggravating  and  mitigating
circumstances have to be separately identified under a rigorous
measure.
133.  Bachan  Singh  when  mandates  principled  precedent-based
sentencing, compels careful scrutiny of mitigating circumstances
and aggravating circumstances and then factoring in a process by
which aggravating and mitigating circumstances appearing from
the pool of comparable cases can be compared. The weight which
is accorded by the court to particular aggravating and mitigating
circumstances  may  vary  from  case  to  case  in  the  name  of
individualised  sentencing,  but  at  the  same  time  reasons  for
apportionment of weights shall be forthcoming. Such a comparison
may point out excessiveness as also will help repel arbitrariness
108objections in future. A sentencing hearing, comparative review of
cases  and  similarly  aggravating  and  mitigating  circumstances
analysis can only be given a go-by if the sentencing court opts for
life imprisonment.”
46.3.In the case of Vasanta Sampat Dupare (supra), where this Court
dealt  with  the  main  appeals  and  thereafter, the  review  petitions  and
confirmed the death sentence for the offence under Section 302 IPC, the
accused had taken the victim girl on his bicycle when she was playing in
the courtyard and was found to have raped and murdered her. The facts
of the said case had been strikingly similar to the facts of the present
case, where it was found that the accused raped the four-year-old victim
girl, and battered and smashed her head by stones and killed her.
46.3.1.  In  the  main  judgment  dealing  with  the  appeals  in  Vasanta
Sampat Dupare17, this Court examined all the circumstances, including
the misuse of trust reposed by the girl in the accused; the factual matrix
unfolding the premeditation, the proclivity and the rapacious desire; the
crime speaking of depravity and degradation; the crime being diabolical
and  barbaric;  and  less  likelihood  of  reformation/rehabilitation  of  the
convict. Thus, this Court upheld the sentence of death while observing as
under: -
“58. Presently, we  shall  proceed  to  dwell  upon  the  manner  in
which the crime was committed. Materials on record clearly reveal
that the appellant was well acquainted with the inhabitants of the
locality and as is demonstrable he had access to the house of the
father of the deceased and the children used to call him “uncle”.
He had lured the deceased to go with him to have chocolates. It is
an act of taking advantage of absolute innocence. He had taken
the deceased from place to place by his bicycle and eventually
raped  her  in  a  brutal  manner, as  if  he  had  an  insatiable  and
17 reported as (2015) 1 SCC 253 .
109ravenous appetite. The injuries caused on the minor girl are likely
to send a chill in the spine of the society and shiver in the marrows
of human conscience. He had battered her to death by assaulting
her with two heavy stones. The injured minor girl could not have
shown any kind of resistance. It is not a case where the accused
had a momentary lapse. It is also not a case where the minor child
had died because of profuse bleeding due to rape but because of
the deliberate cruel assault by the appellant. After the savage act
was over, the coolness of the appellant is evident, for he washed
the clothes on the tap and took proper care to hide things. As is
manifest, he even did not think for a moment the trauma and
torture  that  was  caused  to  the  deceased.  The  gullibility  and
vulnerability of the four year girl, who could not have nurtured any
idea  about  the  maladroitly  designed  biological  desires  of  this
nature, went with the uncle who extinguished her life-spark. The
barbaric act of the appellant does not remotely show any concern
for the precious life of a young minor child who had really not seen
life. The criminality of the conduct of the appellant is not only
depraved and debased, but can have a menacing effect on the
society. It is calamitous.
*** *** ***
60. In  the  case  at  hand,  as  we  find,  not  only  was  the  rape
committed in a brutal manner but murder was also committed in a
barbaric manner. The rape of a minor girl child is nothing but a
monstrous  burial  of  her  dignity  in  the  darkness.  It  is  a  crime
against the holy body of a girl child and the soul of society and
such a crime is aggravated by the manner in which it has been
committed. The nature of the crime and the manner in which it has
been  committed  speaks  about  its  uncommonness.  The  crime
speaks  of  depravity,  degradation  and  uncommonality.  It  is
diabolical and barbaric. The crime was committed in an inhuman
manner.  Indubitably,  these  go  a  long  way  to  establish  the
aggravating circumstances.
61. We are absolutely conscious that mitigating circumstances are
to  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  learned  counsel  for  the
appellant pointing out the mitigating circumstances would submit
that the appellant is in his mid-fifties and there is possibility of his
reformation. Be it noted, the appellant was aged about forty-seven
years at the time of commission of the crime. As is noticeable,
there has been no remorse on the part of the appellant. There are
cases when this Court has commuted the death sentence to life
finding that the accused has expressed remorse or the crime was
not premeditated. But the obtaining factual matrix when unfolded
stage by stage would show the premeditation, the proclivity and
the rapacious desire. The learned counsel would submit that the
appellant had no criminal antecedents but we find that he was a
history-sheeter and had a number of cases pending against him.
That alone may not be sufficient. The appalling cruelty shown by
110him  to  the  minor  girl  child  is  extremely  shocking  and  it  gets
accentuated, when his age is taken into consideration. It was not
committed under any mental stress or emotional disturbance and it
is difficult to comprehend that he would not commit such acts and
would be reformed or rehabilitated. As the circumstances would
graphically depict, he would remain a menace to society, for a
defenceless child has become his prey. In our considered opinion,
there are no mitigating circumstances.
62. As we perceive, this case deserves to fall in the category of
the rarest of rare cases. It is inconceivable from the perspective of
the society that a married man aged about two scores and seven
makes a four-year minor innocent girl child the prey of his lust and
deliberately causes her death. A helpless and defenceless child
gets  raped  and  murdered  because  of the acquaintance  of  the
appellant with the people of the society. This is not only betrayal of
an individual trust but destruction and devastation of social trust. It
is  perversity  in  its  enormity. It  irrefragably  invites  the  extreme
abhorrence and indignation of the collective. It is an anathema to
the social balance. In our view, it meets the test of the rarest of the
rare case and we unhesitatingly so hold.
63. Consequently, we dismiss the criminal appeals preferred by
the appellant and affirm the death sentence.”
46.3.2.In  the  review  petitions,  several  other  mitigating  circumstances
were projected before the Court including the qualifications acquired by
the accused during the pendency of the matter and the probability of his
reformation. This Court found that the aggravating circumstances, i.e.,
extreme  depravity  and  barbaric  manner  of  the  crime  outweighed  the
mitigating circumstances. Hence, while dismissing the review petitions,
this Court observed and concluded as under18: -
“21. The material placed on record shows that after the judgment
under review, the petitioner has completed Bachelors Preparatory
Programme  offered  by  Indira  Gandhi  National  Open  University
enabling him to prepare for Bachelor level study and that he has
also completed the Gandhi Vichar Pariksha and had participated
in drawing competition organised sometime in January 2016. It is
asserted  that  the  jail  record  of  the  petitioner  is  without  any
blemish. The matter is not contested as regards Conditions (1),
18 The decision in review petitions reported as (2017) 6 SCC 631 .
111(2), (5), (6) and (7) as stated in para 206 of the decision in  Bachan
Singh, but what is now being projected is that there is a possibility
of the accused being reformed and rehabilitated. Though these
attempts on part of the petitioner are after the judgment under
review, we have considered the material in that behalf to see if
those  circumstances  warrant  a  different  view.  We  have  given
anxious consideration to the material on record but find that the
aggravating circumstances, namely, the extreme depravity and the
barbaric manner in which the crime was committed and the fact
that the victim was a helpless girl of four years clearly outweigh
the mitigating circumstances now brought on record. Having taken
an overall view of the matter, in our considered view, no case is
made out to take a different view in the matter. We, therefore,
affirm the view taken in the judgment under review and dismiss the
present review petitions.”
47.In  the  case  of  Pappu  (supra),  after  taking  note  of  various
decisions on the subject, we had summarised the principles evolved and
norms followed by the Courts in the matters involving capital punishment;
and would iterate the same as under: -
“41. It could readily be seen that while this Court has found it
justified to have capital punishment on the statute to serve as
deterrent  as  also  in  due  response  to  the  society’s  call  for
appropriate punishment in appropriate cases but at the same time,
the  principles  of  penology  have  evolved  to  balance  the  other
obligations of the society, i.e., of preserving the human life, be it of
accused, unless termination thereof is inevitable and is to serve
the other societal causes and collective conscience of society. This
has  led  to  the  evolution  of  ‘rarest  of  rare  test’  and  then,  its
appropriate operation with reference to ‘crime test’ and ‘criminal
test’. The delicate balance expected of the judicial process has
also led to another mid-way approach, in curtailing the rights of
remission or premature release while awarding imprisonment for
life, particularly when dealing with crimes of heinous nature like
the present one.”
The theory of residual doubt
48.As regards the theory of ‘residual doubt’, which has been heavily
relied upon by the learned senior counsel  for the appellant, we may
usefully reiterate that nothing of any so-called ‘residual doubt’ theory was
112referred to or applied in the cases cited by the learned counsel. Rather, in
the  case  of  Sakru  Mahagu  Binjewar  (supra),  the  proposition  for
extending benefit of doubt was rejected by this Court with reference to the
overwhelming and unimpeachable evidence on record. Be that as it may,
we may profitably refer to the relevant decisions to point out the approach
of this Court towards this theory as also the fact that the propositions
about inapplicability of this theory have been clearly stated in the later
decisions, as discussed infra. 
48.1.In the case of Ravishankar Alias Baba Vishwakarma v. State of
Madhya Pradesh : (2019) 9 SCC 689 , a 3-Judge Bench of this Court re-
affirmed the conviction of the appellant of offences of kidnapping, rape,
and resultant death of a 13-year-old girl and destruction of evidence. The
case had been that of circumstantial evidence and on the question of
sentence,  this  Court  examined  as  to  whether  death  sentence  was
justified. Though this Court made it clear that even in the case where
conviction is based on circumstantial evidence, capital punishment could
be awarded but then, proceeded to observe that this Court had been
increasingly  applying  the  theory  of  ‘residual  doubt’ ,  which  effectively
create a higher standard of proof over and above the “beyond reasonable
doubt” standard used at the stage of conviction, as a safeguard against
routine capital sentencing, keeping in mind the irreversibility of death.
Applying this theory and indicating certain ‘residual doubts’, it was held
that the said case fell short of ‘rarest of rare’ category; and the death
113sentence was commuted into one of life for the remainder of the natural
life of the convict.
48.2.However,  in  Shatrughna  Baban  Meshram  v.  State  of
Maharashtra : (2021) 1 SCC 596 , another 3-Judge Bench of this Court
considered an appeal against conviction and award of death sentence for
rape and murder of a 2½-year-old girl by her maternal uncle. On the
question of sentencing, 67 cases decided by the Supreme Court over the
past 40 years were noticed; and it was observed that when the offences
were of Sections 376 and 302 IPC, and the age of the victim was under
16 years, death sentence was confirmed in 15, but in 3 of them, the
sentence was later on commuted to life in review. Hence, in only 12 out of
the 67 cases the death sentence was confirmed. As regards the guiding
factors, it was held that death penalty was not entirely impermissible to be
awarded in circumstantial evidence cases but the circumstantial evidence
ought to be of unimpeachable character with option of lesser sentence
foreclosed. The Court also examined the theory of ‘residual doubt’ and,
after  a  survey  of  the  decisions  of  this  Court  and  those  of  the  U.S.
Supreme  Court,  opined  against  the  applicability  of  this  theory  in  the
following passages: -
“75.4. These features are only illustrative to say that the theory of
“residual doubt” that got developed was a result of peculiarity in
the process adopted. Even then, what is material to note is that
the theory has consistently been rejected by the US Supreme
Court  and  as  stated  by  O'Connor,  J.:  “Nothing  in  our  cases
mandated the imposition of this heightened burden of proof at
capital sentencing.”
*** *** ***
11477. When it comes to cases based on circumstantial evidence in
our jurisprudence, the standard that is adopted in terms of law laid
down by this Court as noticed in  Sharad Birdhichand Sarda  and
subsequent decisions is that the circumstances must not only be
individually proved or established, but they must form a consistent
chain, so conclusive as to rule out the possibility of any other
hypothesis except the guilt of the accused. On the strength of
these principles, the burden in such cases is already of a greater
magnitude. Once that burden is discharged, it is implicit that any
other hypothesis or the innocence of the accused, already stands
ruled out when the matter is taken up at the stage of sentence
after returning the finding of guilt. So, theoretically the concept or
theory of “residual doubt” does not have any place in a case based
on  circumstantial  evidence.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  theory  of
residual doubt was never accepted by the US Supreme Court as
discussed earlier .”
(emphasis supplied)
48.2.1.This Court also referred to some of the decisions of this Court
where the said theory of ‘residual doubt’ was referred to, including that in
Ashok Debbarma Alias Achak Debbarma v. State of Tripura : (2014) 4
SCC 747, and it was pointed out that those  ‘matters were considered
from the standpoint of individual fact situation where, going by the higher
or stricter standard for imposition of death penalty, alternative to death
sentence was found to be appropriate’.19
48.3.We may  also  observe  that  the  theory  of  ‘residual  doubt’ was
previously suggested before us in the case of Pappu (supra) but, in that
case, it was not considered necessary to dilate much on this aspect
because  a  strong  case  for  commuting  death  sentence  into that of
imprisonment  for life  was  nevertheless  made  out  with  the  mitigating
factors of probability of reformation and rehabilitation of the convict and
his satisfactory jail conduct. However, we had indicated, with reference to
19 Vide paragraphs 76 to 76.4 of the said decision in Shatrughna Baban Meshram .
115the aforesaid decision in the case of Shatrughna Baban Meshram , as
follows:-
“43.2.  Having  said so, we may observe that so far as the other
arguments on behalf of the appellant, with reference to the theory
of ‘residual doubt’,  are concerned,  in the later 3-Judge  Bench
decision  of  this  Court  in  Shatrughna  Baban  Meshram
(supra), it was observed that  the said theory, developed as a result
of peculiarity in the process adopted in U.S. jurisdictions, has  not
found favour  even by the U.S.  Supreme Court. We need not dilate
on  this  aspect  any  further  in  the  present  case  for  the  simple
reason that the strong mitigating factor of  probability of reformation
and rehabilitation, particularly with reference to  the antecedents
and background  of the appellant coupled with his satisfactory jail
conduct, make out a case for communing death sentence  into that
of imprisonment  for life.”
48.4.For what has been discussed hereinabove and to put the record
straight, we deem it appropriate to observe that in the case based on
circumstantial evidence, the conclusion of guilt is recorded only after the
circumstances  are  found  to  be  forming  an  unbreakable  chain,  so
consistent as to rule out any other hypothesis except the guilt of the
accused. These being stringent norms, as followed consistently by the
Courts  based  on  the  panchsheel  principles  expounded  in  Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda  (supra), and requirement being of the proof of the
case beyond reasonable doubt, theoretically there is no scope for any
‘residual doubt’ operating even in the cases of circumstantial evidence.
The cases in which theory of residual doubt has at all been referred, had
been standing on their own facts, where alternative to death sentence
was  considered  appropriate.  However, while  taking  up  the  matter  for
sentencing,  it  is  not  expected  to  reopen  the  chain  of  circumstantial
evidence to find any weak link which may fall in the category of residual
116doubt. Needless to reiterate that if at all any such doubt is reasonably
existing, the very basis of conviction would be in question. To put it in
other words, after the final conclusion on the guilt and after pronouncing
conviction,  no  concept  of  residual  doubt  as such is available  for  the
purpose of sentencing.
49.However, even when we find no reason to proceed on the theory
of residual doubt, the question of sentence in the present case has to be
determined in accordance with sentencing principles enunciated by the
Constitution Bench in  Bachan Singh  (supra) and the principles/norms
further  evolved  by  this  Court  in  the  other  decisions,  as  noticed
hereinbefore  with  the  requirements  of  close  analysis  of  ‘crime  test’,
‘criminal test’ and ‘rarest of rare test’. 
The  crime  and  criminal  tests:  Aggravating  and  Mitigating
circumstances of the present case   
50.Keeping the aforesaid principles in view, we need to examine the
material  facts  as  also  all  the  relevant  factors  and  circumstances  for
determining the question as to whether the capital punishment awarded
to  the  appellant  be  maintained  or  be  substituted  by  any  other
punishment?
50.1.Before  examining  the  material  facts  and  the  relevant
circumstances, we may observe that so far the Trial Court is concerned, it
had scrupulously carried out its duty in terms of Section 235(2) CrPC. The
judgment of conviction was pronounced on 28.09.2013 and the question
117of sentence was taken up 3 clear days later, i.e., on 01.10.2013; and the
death  sentence  was  awarded  only  after  duly  hearing  the  accused-
appellant,  after  duly  taking  into  consideration  the  aggravating  and
mitigating factors , and while duly recording special reasons.
50.2.The heinous nature of the crime, like that of the present one, in
brutal rape and killing of a mentally and physically challenged girl, who
was only about seven-and-a-half-year-old,  definitely carries excessively
aggravating circumstances, particularly when the manner of commission
of both the major offences of rape and murder shows depravity of highest
order and would ex facie shock anyone’s conscience. The horrific manner
of killing the victim, by causing ghastly head injuries had been nothing
less  than  beastly  conduct  of  the  appellant.  However,  as  noticed,
gruesome  nature  of  the  action  and  the  crime,  by  itself,  may  not  be
decisive, particularly as regards the question of capital punishment. Thus,
we need to cautiously examine the other relevant factors, particularly
those of the tests pertaining to the criminal himself.  
50.3.Undoubtedly, the appellant was 28 years of age at the time of
commission of crime and was having family comprising of his wife, an
eight-year-old daughter and parents. He is not shown to be coming from
any affluent background but, at the same time, it is also not shown if he
comes from a very poor socio-economic background. Taken as a whole,
these factors of the age, family and socio-economic background of the
118appellant  are  not  so  clinching  as  to  overwhelm  and  override  the
aggravating factors. 
50.3.1.Then,  the  pertinent  question  is  as  to  whether  there  exists  a
reasonable probability of reformation and rehabilitation of the appellant?
If the answer to this material question is in the affirmative, it may have
bearing upon the test to find if the case falls in rarest of rare category.
But, if there are factors which operate against affirmative answer to this
question  on  the  probability  of  reformation  and  rehabilitation,  the
aggravating  circumstances  would  assuredly  outweigh  the  mitigating
circumstances warranting capital punishment.
50.4.In regard to the above, the facts emerging from record are as
follows:
50.4.1.It is noticed that before the Trial Court, a suggestion was made
while pleading leniency for the appellant, that it was his first offence. This
suggestion, however, does not appear to be correct.  It is noticeable from
the  contents  of  the  charge-sheet  that  in  the  process  of  residence
verification,  it  was  found  that  the  appellant  was  hailing  from  village
Basantpur, Police Station Gugli, District Maharajganj, Uttar Pradesh; and
it came to the light that he had had a history of criminal cases inasmuch
as, he was charge-sheeted in Case No. 69 of 2011 of Police Station
Shambhupura,  District  Chittorgarh  for  offence  under  Section  3  of
Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 and 307 IPC. He was
119also involved in Police Station Kankroli20 Case Nos. 78 of 2012 and 79 of
2012 for offence under Section 379 IPC; and in Police Station Rajnagar
Case No. 428 of 2012 for offence under Section 379 IPC.
50.4.2.There  is  another  crucial  fact  having  direct  co-relation  and
connection  with  the  present  case  itself,  which  emanates  from  the
statement  of  PW-23  Ramdev  Regar,  Sub-Inspector,  Police  Line,
Rajsamand. He testified to the fact that on 14.01.2013, a written report
about  the  theft  of  Hero  Honda  Passion  Plus  motorcycle  bearing
registration No. RJ30 3M 5944 was filed at Police Station Nathdwara,
whereupon, FIR bearing No. 39 of 2013 was registered for offence under
Section  379  IPC  against  unknown  person.  Significantly,  the  said
motorcycle bearing registration No. RJ30 3M 5944 was the same one
which was used by the appellant in the present crime. This motorcycle
was recovered near the scene of crime at the information of the appellant;
and bloodstains were also collected therefrom; and DNA profile of those
bloodstains matched the DNA profile of the blood samples of the victim
girl.  
50.5.Thus, the facts surfacing on record make it clear that the crime in
question  was  not  the  singular  criminal  activity  of  the  appellant.  The
antecedents of the appellant depict a person whose conduct had not
been free from blemish and, in any case, he committed the crimes of
kidnapping as also murder of the victim girl with the use of a vehicle
20 The same police station which has dealt with the present case.  
120which did not belong to him but was a stolen one21. In other words, the
past of the appellant before the present case had been of involvement in
criminal cases; and abhorrent crimes of the present case were committed
by him with the aid of a stolen vehicle. These facts and factors magnify
the aggravating circumstances manifold.
51.In view of what has been noticed hereinabove, the net result of
crime test and criminal test could be summarised as follows: The present
case had been of extreme inhumane acts and actions of the appellant
where, amongst other offending acts and actions, he (1) kidnapped the
victim girl, who was only 7½ years of age, who was even otherwise a
mentally and physically challenged child, with betrayal of trust when the
victim girl got lured with confectionary items given by him; (2) brutally
raped the victim girl, as noticeable from the gruesome injuries on and
around her private parts and as established by the medical officers who
conducted  post-mortem;  and  (3)  mercilessly  killed  the  victim  girl  by
causing horrid injuries on her head, as established not only by the doctors
but also by the surrounding facts, including bloodstains on the scene of
crime, on the motorcycle, and on the clothing of the appellant at the time
of his arrest. On the personal score, even though the appellant was about
28 years of age and was having the family of wife, a daughter who was
also  about  8  years  of  age  and  aged  parents,  he  was  continuously
involved in criminal activities. Even if the other past cases are left aside,
21 As per the evidence of PW-23 Ramdev Regar, the report about theft of the motorcycle in
question was lodged at Police Station Nathdwara on 14.01.2013 i.e., 3 days before the incident
of the present case.
121he  committed  the  crimes  in  question  by  using  a  stolen  motorcycle.
Unfortunately, the matter does not end here. 
51.1. The  tremors  thrown  by  the  appellant  to  shock  anyone’s
conscience with his beastly conduct have not stopped even with this
inhumane crime and even after his conviction.
52.As noticed, in a substantial number of cases, when nothing further
exacerbates  the  crime  in  question,  the  Courts  have  refrained  from
awarding or approving death sentence even in the cases of gruesome
killings, essentially on the premise that even a semblance of probability of
reformation  of  the  convict  ought  to  be  given  a  chance,  rather  than
awarding  capital  punishment,  which  is  of  irretrievable  nature.  In  this
regard,  the  jail  conduct  of  the  convict  carries  its  own  bearing  and
relevance in the overall consideration; and this Court has leaned in favour
of commuting the sentence of death to that of imprisonment for life in
case of unblemished jail conduct, even if the crime itself had been of
gruesome or abhorrent nature22-23. However, in the present case, the
further  shocking  and  disturbing  factor  is  that  even  while  in  jail,  the
22 The case of Pappu v. The State of Uttar Pradesh : Criminal Appeal Nos. 1097-1098 of
2018 decided on 09.02.2022  by us is directly an illustration of this approach where, despite
finding it to be similar case of gruesome rape and murder of a seven-year-old girl child, we
found the unblemished jail conduct coupled with other circumstances indicating the probability
of reformation of the convict and hence, commuted the death sentence into that of imprisonment
for life but with stipulations of his undergoing actual imprisonment for a period of 30 years. 
23 The case of Veerendra v. State of Madhya Pradesh : Criminal Appeal Nos. 5-6 of 2018
decided on 13.05.2022  by us is another direct illustration of this approach where, despite
finding it to be similar case of gruesome rape and murder of an eight-year-old girl child, who
was daughter of the cousin of the convict, we observed that the convict’s unblemished jail
conduct coupled with other mitigating circumstances would not go unnoticed; and probability of
reformation and rehabilitation of the convict was not ruled out. Hence, we again adopted the
course of commuting the death sentence into that of imprisonment for life with stipulations of
actual imprisonment for a period of 30 years.
122appellant’s conduct has not been free from blemish where, apart from
quarrelling  with  other  inmate  on  17.04.2015  and  earning  7  days’
punishment, the appellant had been accused and convicted of the offence
of yet another murder, this time of a co-inmate of the jail, while joining
hands with three other inmates.
53.At this juncture, we may again point out that the fact regarding the
appellant’s involvement in another  murder while being in jail  and his
conviction of the offence under Section 302/34 IPC came to be stated
only in the written submissions filed on behalf of the respondent-State
after conclusion of hearing. Such a fact having not been specified during
the course of hearing, we posted the matter for further directions and, on
14.02.2022, the State was directed to place the relevant facts on record
with affidavit of the officer concerned. In compliance thereof, an affidavit
of Rakesh Mohan Sharma, Superintendent, Central Jail, Jaipur has been
filed and a copy of judgment and order dated 10.01.2020 in Sessions
Case No. 204 of 2019 by the Court of Special Judge (Prevention of Sati)
and Additional Sessions Judge, Jaipur Metropolitan has also been filed. A
perusal of the material placed on record makes it clear that the appellant,
with three other jail inmates, has been convicted by the Trial Court of the
offence under Section 302/34 IPC for murder of another jail inmate, who
was a Pakistani national in the high security cell of the prison; and that
the appellant has been awarded the sentence of imprisonment for life.
Though it has been pointed out that an appeal against the said decision is
123pending and we would not be making any comments on the merits of that
case at all but, the appellant’s culpable conduct in jail compels us to
ponder over the question as to whether it would be realistic to believe on
the probability of his reformation and rehabilitation yet.
54.We may also observe that even though rarest of rare doctrine and
its accompanying principles, as enunciated and explained in  Bachan
Singh and Machhi Singh  (supra), have been almost uniformly applied by
Courts in the country while dealing with the question of sentencing when
the  statute  provides  for  death  penalty;  and  over  the  time,  even  the
proposition of larger/longer term of actual imprisonment with no remission
or curtailed remission has also evolved but, it has never been the effort of
the  Courts  to  somehow  make  this  punishment  (sentence  of  death)
redundant  and  non-existent  for  all  practical  purposes.  The  quest  for
justice in such cases, with death sentence being awarded and maintained
only  in  extreme  cases,  does  not  mean  that  the  matter  would  be
approached and examined in the manner that death sentence has be
avoided, even if the matter indeed calls for such a punishment. The
judicial process, in our view, would be compromising on its objectivity if
the approach is to nullify the statutory provision carrying death sentence
as an alternative punishment for major offences (like that of Section 302
IPC), even after it has passed muster of judicial scrutiny and has been
held  not  unconstitutional.  The  pursuit  in  collecting  mitigating
circumstances could also not be taken up with any notion or idea that
124somehow, some factor be found; or if not found, be deduced anyhow so
that the sentence of death be forsaken. Such an approach would be
unrealistic, unwarranted and rather not upholding the rule of law. 
55.An attempt has been made to suggest on behalf of the appellant
that  his  overall  conduct  in  prison  is  without  any  blemish  except  the
allegation of his involvement in a case of murder. We could only wonder
what  more  of  criminal  activity  would  qualify  as  blemish,  if  not  the
involvement and conviction in a case of murder of a fellow jail inmate!
This is apart from the other 7 days’ punishment earned by the appellant
for quarrelling with another jail inmate. 
56.We  may  also  take  into  account  another  suggestion  made  on
behalf of the appellant that his psychological evaluation report may be
called. 
56.1.In the case of Anil @ Anthony Arikswamy Joseph v. State of
Maharashtra : 2014 (4) SCC 69 , this Court observed that in appropriate
cases, after conviction, the Court may call for report to determine whether
the accused could be reformed or rehabilitated; and it would depend on
the facts and circumstances of each case24. Again, there cannot be any
universal formula for calling for a report in terms of the said decision in
Anil. For example, in the present case, where the appellant is found to be
indulging incessantly in criminal activities before the crime in question;
has carried out gruesome deeds of the present crime; has further been
24 Vide paragraph 33, SCC p. 86.
125involved in questionable jail conduct, including quarrelling with a fellow
inmate and earning 7 days’ punishment; and then, to cap it all, has been
involved in an offence of no less degree than murder of another jail
inmate, calling for any further report of the likelihood of reformation and
rehabilitation  of  the  appellant  could  be  proposed  only  if  the  judicial
process is determined to annul the death sentence altogether, by finding
one way or the other to avoid the same in every case. Such an approach
would be counter-productive to the entire system of maintenance of order
in the society; and could be countenanced only if we would be inclined to
think that whatever be the society’s cry for justice, the statutory provision
of death sentence should itself be given its interment or burial. Obviously,
this approach would be squarely contrary to the statutory mandates as
also the principles enunciated by multiple Constitution Bench decisions of
this Court; and would strike at the roots of the rule of law.  In the given set
of circumstances of this case, the suggestions about calling for any so-
called psychological evaluation report could only be termed as impractical
and unrealistic and could only be rejected. 
57.In  the  present  case,  where  all  the  elements  surrounding  the
offence as also all the elements surrounding the offender cut across the
balance  sheet  of  aggravating  and  mitigating  circumstances,  we  are
clearly of the view that there is absolutely no reason to commute the
sentence of death to any other sentence of lesser degree. Even the
alternative of awarding the sentence of imprisonment for whole of the
126natural life with no remission does not appear justified in view of the
nature of crimes committed by the appellant and looking to his incorrigible
conduct.
58.We may sum up thus: In the case of the present nature, the crime
had been of extreme depravity, which shocks the conscience, particularly
looking to the target (a seven-and-a-half-year old mentally and physically
challenged girl) and then, looking to the manner of committing murder,
where  the  hapless  victim’s  head  was  literally  smashed,  resulting  in
multiple injuries including fracture of frontal bone. This is apart from the
facts that the innocent victim was kidnapped on a stolen motorcycle by
misusing the trust gained by offer of confectionary items and also, apart
from the fact that she was brutally and inhumanly raped. Taking up the
test parameters pertaining to the criminal (i.e., the appellant), of course,
he has a family with wife and minor daughter and aged father and the
crime was committed when he was only 28 years of age. However, these
mitigating factors are pitted against several other factors pertaining to the
appellant himself.  One, being of his activities and  actions before  the
present crime where he was found involved in at least four cases with
offences  ranging  from  Section  3  of  Prevention  of  Damage  to  Public
Property Act, 1984, Section 379 IPC and even 307 IPC. Second, being
the fact that the present crime itself was carried out with the aid of a
stolen  motorcycle.  Third,  and  crucial  one  being  his  conduct  post-
conviction  where  he  not  only  earned  7  days’  punishment  in  jail  for
127quarrelling with a co-inmate but he has been convicted of the offence of
murder of another jail inmate. Read as a whole, the fact-sheet concerning
the appellant leads only the logical deduction that there is no possibility
that he would not relapse again in this crime if given any indulgence. A
fortiori, there appears no probability of his reformation and rehabilitation.
This possibility of the appellant relapsing in the same crime over again
and nil probability of his reformation/rehabilitation is a direct challenge as
also danger to the maintenance of order in the society. Hence, the facts of
the present case, taken as a whole, make it clear that it is unlikely that the
appellant, if given an absolution, would not be capable of and would not
be inclined to commit such a crime again. Consequently, we find it to be a
case of no other option but to confirm the death sentence awarded to the
appellant, for that being inevitable in this particular case.
59.Before concluding on this matter, we deem it appropriate to put on
record our appreciation for the learned senior counsel appearing in legal
aid for the appellant who, despite having a tough brief to handle, has
attempted his best to espouse the cause of the appellant. 
Conclusion
60.Accordingly,  these  appeals  are  dismissed;  conviction  of  the
appellant of offences under Sections 363, 365, 376(2)(f), 302 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 and Section 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences  Act,  2012  is  confirmed;  and  the  sentences  awarded  to  the
128appellant, including the death sentence for the offence under Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, are also confirmed. 
……....…………………….J.
(A.M. KHANWILKAR) 1
……....…………………….J.
(DINESH MAHESHWARI)
……....…………………….J.
(C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 24, 2022
129