REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  4545 OF 2022
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.13800 OF 2021)
Karan Kapoor                                         …Appellant
Versus
Madhuri Kumar                      ...Respondent
J U D G M E N T
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
Leave granted.
2.This   appeal   arises   out   of   the   Judgment   dated
08.04.2021, passed by the High Court of Delhi in Regular
First  Appeal  No.218  of  2021  (hereinafter referred  as  ‘RFA
No.218 of 2021’) preferred by the Appellant, whereby the said
RFA was dismissed and the High Court thereby upheld the
Order dated 01.12.2020 passed in Civil Suit No.867 of 2018
and Review Order dated 17.02.2021 in Civil Suit No.867 of
12018  passed  by  ADJ­O7,  Saket   Court,  (South   East),  New
Delhi.
3.The brief facts of the matter are that Appellant was a
tenant   in   the   Residential   Property   owned   by   Respondent
bearing  No.  B­228, Ground  Floor, Greater Kailash­1,  New
Delhi­110048, including the built­up area in the stilt portion
of the building (hereinafter referred as the ‘Suit Property’),
which comprises of drawing room, dining room, a foyer, four
bedrooms with attached bathrooms, kitchen, lounge, service
area   and   a   servant   quarter   with   common   bathroom   and
parking for two cars. The Respondent­Landlord entered into a
Lease   Agreement   dated   07.08.2011   with   proprietorship
concern of the Appellant, namely M/s. Fantasy Lights, at
monthly  rent  of  Rs.1,17,000/­ for a  period  of 24 months
starting from  07.08.2011 till  07.08.2013  and interest  free
security deposit of Rs.3,51,000/­ (Three Lakhs Fifty – One
Thousand Only) was paid by the Appellant at the time of the
execution of the Lease Agreement. After the expiry of the
Lease   Agreement,   an   extended   Lease   Agreement   for
subsequent term of 11 months was executed on 07.08.2013
2at the rate of Rent of Rs.1,50,000/­ per month which was to
expire on 06.07.2014. The Security Deposit paid earlier was
retained   as   Interest   Free   Security   Deposit   towards   Lease
Agreement dated 07.08.2013 as well.
4.The Appellant tenant did not pay any rent after the
expiry of the extended Lease Agreement dated 06.07.2014
with effect from 07.07.2014 and continued in occupation of
the   Suit   Property.   A   Legal   Notice   dated   12.04.2018   was
served by the Respondent landlord upon the Appellant calling
him to vacate the Suit Property. However, even thereafter,
neither the Suit Property was vacated, nor the rent was paid
which led the Respondent/Plaintiff to file Civil Suit No.867 of
2018 for recovery of possession, arrears of rent, mesne profit,
Pendent   Lite,   and   interest   before   ADJ­O7,   Saket   Court,
(South   East),   New   Delhi.   The   Appellant/Defendant   filed   a
Written Statement  contending that after the expiry of the
Lease Agreement dated 07.08.2013, the Respondent/Plaintiff
had approached to him and made the offer to sell the right,
title and interest in the Suit Property, in furtherance of which
Agreement to Sell dated 22.04.2017 (herein after referred as
3‘ATS­I’)   was   executed   between   the   parties   for   a   sum   of
Rs.3,60,00,000/­ (Three Crores and Sixty Lakhs Only) and it
was allegedly agreed that the rent accrued for the year 2014­
2017 be adjusted into the said Agreement to Sell. Appellant
also contended that in addition to the execution of ATS­I, he
also agreed to transfer its right, title and interest of a plot of
land   situated   at   Amloh   in   favor   of   Respondent   for   a
consideration   of   Rs.15   Lakhs   through   Agreement   to   Sell
(‘ATS­II’) which would partially satisfy the obligations of sale
consideration of ATS­I. Further, it was averred in the Written
Statement   that   certain   adjustments   were   made   to   the
consideration payable for the subject property consequent to
a new Agreement to Sell (‘ATS­III’) was executed.
5.In view of the averments made in Written Statement
filed by the Appellant/Defendant in Civil Suit No.867 of 2018,
the Respondent/Plaintiff filed an Application under Order XII
Rule 6 and another application under Order XXXIX Rule 10
of the Code of Civil Procedure (in short ‘CPC’) with a prayer to
pass   a   judgment   on   admission   of   facts   made   in   Written
Statement and to draw a decree accordingly.
46.The contention of the Respondent/Plaintiff before the
Trial Court was that looking to the admissions made with
respect to the Landlord­Tenant relationship, rate of rent and
the   defense   taken   by   the   Appellant/Defendant   in   Written
Statement   is   sham,   as   no   consideration   was   exchanged.
While on the other side, the Appellant/Defendant contended
that   the   Respondent/Plaintiff   has   concealed   the   material
facts regarding existence of ATS­I, II and III, though the two
Lease   Agreement   dated   07.08.2011   and   dated   07.08.2013
were not denied. It was said only on the expiry of the term of
the   extended   Lease   Agreement,   the   Respondent/Plaintiff
approached the Appellant/Defendant and offered to sell the
Suit Property. Further it was contended that, no demand to
the accrued rent was made as it was agreed between the
parties that the amount of rent shall be adjusted in ATS. In
furtherance of which ATS­I dated 22.04.2017 was executed
by the Respondent/Plaintiff in favor of Appellant/Defendant
with respect to Suit Property where Appellant agreed to pay
Rs.3,60,00,000/­ as consideration. It was also contended by
the Appellant/Defendant before the Trial Court that earlier
5Rs.4.7 Cr. was agreed towards consideration, however, after
the payment of enormous earnest money to the Respondent
before signing ATS­I, the consideration was reduced to Rs.3.6
Cr.   Subsequently,   Second   Agreement   to   Sell   dated
22.05.2017 was signed to transfer Appellant’s rights, title and
interest in the property situated in Amloh to representatives
of Respondent for a sum of Rs.15,00,000/­ (Fifteen Lakhs
Only) which was to be adjusted towards the consideration of
Rs.3.6   Cr.   payable   to   the   Respondent.   Further,   Third
Agreement to Sell dated 30.12.2017 was executed between
the   parties   consequent   to   the   aforesaid   adjustments.   The
Appellant/Defendant also argued before the Trial Court to
have approached the Allahabad Bank for loan amounting to
Rs.1.7   Cr.   to   purchase   the   Suit   Property,   but   the
Respondent/Plaintiff   refused   to   execute   the   subject   Sale
Deed. Lastly, it was submitted that there is no clear and
categorical   admission   from   his   side   and   the   Written
Statement filed by him and the suit has to be read as a whole
and   not   in   isolation.   Moreover,   the   present   Suit   involves
adjudication of facts and serious questions of law which is
6possible only after leading oral evidence and on appreciating
it, therefore, no decree under Order XII Rule 6 can be passed
on the pleadings of the parties. 
7.The Trial Court perused the material on record and in
Para 17 of the order dated 01.12.2020 recorded that there are
certain undisputed facts. Those are: (a) The Plaintiff being
absolute owner of the suit property is not disputed; (b) The
identity of the suit property is not disputed; (c) Execution of
the Lease Agreement dated 07.08.2011 between the Plaintiff
and M/s Fantasy Lights @ Rs.1,17,000/­ per month for the
period of two years is not disputed; (d) Interests free security
deposit of Rs.3,50,000/­ paid by the Defendant to Plaintiff is
not disputed; (e) The execution of Lease Agreement dated
07.08.2013   between   the   Plaintiff   and   Defendant   for   11
months @ Rs.1,50,000/­ per month is also not disputed; (f) It
is not disputed that no rent has been paid since July 2014
though   certain   defenses   have   been   taken   with   respect   to
payment of the said rent; (g) The issuance and receipt of the
legal notice dated 12.04.2018 calling upon the Defendant to
hand over the possession is also not disputed. 
78.Apart from dealing with the aforementioned admissions,
the Trial Court also dealt with each defense taken by the
Appellant   in   the   written   statement   and   observed:   (i)
Appellant /Respondent did not mention any amount which
has been paid by him as  ‘Bayana’  in lieu of the ATS­I dated
22.04.2017.  It is beyond the comprehension of the Court as
to what stopped the A ppellant   from mentioning the  exact
figures of the amount paid by the A ppellant  as ‘Bayana’ ; (ii)
No   document   was   placed   before   the   Court   by
Appellant/Defendant to show the quantum of amount paid as
consideration thus ATS­I executed without any consideration
has no significance; (iii) ATS­II with respect to the   Amloh
Property has also been filed and the same cannot be relied
upon   for   the   aforesaid   reasons;   (iv)   None   of   the   original
Agreements   to   Sell   have   been   filed;   (v)   It   is   a   settled
proposition of law that even if the consideration has been
exchanged the purchaser does not become the owner of the
property till the time the registered Sale Deed is executed in
his favor and the Tenant­Landlord relationship cannot come
to an end on the execution of the Agreement to Sell.  
89.The   Trial   Court   relying   upon   the   admissions   as
aforementioned, passed the judgment and decree allowing the
application under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC for delivery of
possession with respect to the Suit Property in favor of the
Respondent/Plaintiff. Aggrieved Appellant/Defendant sought
review of the Order dated 01.12.2020 wherein the Trial Court
was   pleased   to   dismiss   the   same   vide   order   dated
17.02.2021.
10.The Appellant preferred Regular First Appeal No.218 of
2021 before the High Court of Delhi challenging both the
orders i.e. order dated 01.12.2020 passed by Trial Court and
review   order   dated   17.02.2021.   It   was   the   case   of   the
Appellant   before   the   High   Court   that   a   Suit   for   specific
performance in relation to aforementioned three Agreements
to Sell is pending, in which the High Court has issued notice,
but nowhere the Trial Court has considered the same in the
impugned judgment. Further, Appellant also contended that
no categoric admission was made in the Written Statement to
pass   judgment   granting   decree   of   possession   to   the
Respondent in exercise of discretion under Order XII Rule 6
9of   CPC.   Lastly,   it   was   argued   that   the   Sale   Deed   is   not
required   to   be   registered   in   view   of   Section   17(2)   of   the
Registration Act. 
11.The High Court vide impugned order dated 08.04.2021
rejected the Appeal with observations that the Trial Court in
its order dated 17.02.2021 has noted that there has been
clear   admission   with   regard   to   relationship   of   Landlord­
Tenant   and   the   rent   paid   by   the   Appellant.   Further,   the
Appellate   Court   upheld   the   Trial   Court’s   findings   qua
admission of the facts. The High Court also noted that the
findings qua admissions is not challenged by the Appellant
which is sufficient to grant the decree for possession of suit
property. Further, High Court observed that it is settled in
law   that   the   suit   for   specific   performance   filed   by   the
Appellant is of no impediment for the Trial Court to proceed
with or decide the Suit for possession based on Landlord­
Tenant relationship. Lastly, an ATS of immovable property
where   the   possession   of   premises   is   delivered   in   part
performance  can   only   be   possible  by  registered   document
after   paying   the   requisite   stamp   duty.   The   High   Court
10dismissed   the   Regular   First   Appeal   with   the   said
observations, which is challenged by the Appellant by filing
instant appeal.
12.Appellant has argued before this Court that he is well
within his rights to defend his possession in the suit property
having satisfied the conditions enunciated by this Court in
Shrimant   Rao   Suryavanshi   v.   Prahlad   Bhairoba
Suryavanshi   ­ 2002 (3) SCC 676 . As there is an ATS for
transfer   of   rights   in   the   suit   property   in   favor   of   the
Appellant, which has not been disputed to have been signed
by Respondent. The covenants therefore expressly construes
the intention of parties towards the sale and purchase of the
suit property. It is further argued by the Appellant that the
issues put before the Trial Court were triable issues and in
such a scenario the Trial Court should not dismiss the suit  in
limine and pass a decree under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC when
only   the   truth   can   be   revealed   by   a   full­fledged   trial.
Appellant also argues that when Seller­Landlord accepted the
earnest money she actually acted under the agreement. This
11acceptance provided by the ATS ended the relationship of
lessor and lessee and the tenancy ceases.
13.Appellant   has   placed   reliance   on   Hari   Steel   and
General Industries Limited and Another v. Daljit Singh
and Others – (2019) 20 SCC 425  and Himani Alloys Ltd.
v. Tata Steel Ltd   reported in ­ 2011 (15) SCC 273   to
contend   that   the   Trial   Court   should   have   refrained   from
exercising   its   jurisdiction   by   decreeing   the   suit   of
Respondent/Plaintiff under Order XII Rule 6 keeping in mind
that the judgment on admission is judgment without trial
which permanently denies any remedy to the Appellant on
merit. Further, by referring to the case of  R. Kanthimathi v.
Beatrice   Xavier   reported   in   ­   2000   (9)   SCC   339   the
Appellant argued that by accepting the earnest money, the
Landlord­Seller has actually acted under the agreement and
thus the relationship of landlord and tenant has ceased to
exist.
14.Per Contra, on behalf of Respondent, it has been argued
that the Appellant came in the possession of suit premises by
virtue of lease deed dated 07.08.2011 and extended lease
12deed dated 07.08.2013 and is continuing to be in possession
without payment of rent from 2014 onwards, which makes
out a classic case of abuse of due process of law. It was urged
that Appellant has not put in possession in furtherance to the
ATS, however without proving the contents of ATS his status
would   not   change.   It   was   further   argued   that   once   it   is
admitted   that   there   is   undisputed   Landlord­Tenant
relationship   between   parties;   a   termination   notice   under
Section 106 has been issued prior to filing the suit followed
by receipt of the rent. Thus, the Respondent have a   prima
facie  case to decree the suit on admission under Order XII
Rule 6. Further, it has been argued that the defense under
Section 53­A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 can only be
applicable when consideration has been exchanged which is
not the case of the Appellant. Furthermore, learned senior
counsel placing reliance on   Nagindas Ramdas v. Dalptram
Iccharam ­ 1974 (1) SCC 242  argued that the admissions in
pleadings or in proceedings of Court at the time of hearing of
the   case   stand   on   higher   footing   and   are   admissible   in
evidence as per Section 58 of the Evidence Act, 1872. Thus,
13in light of the facts as discussed, the Respondent has a good
case for a judgment on admission and the courts below have
not committed any error while passing the judgment.
15.Heard learned counsel for both the parties and perused
the records. Prior to appreciating the arguments in the facts
and looking to the controversy involved in the present case, it
is required to know the object and the purport to introduce
Order XII of  CPC. The relevant  provisions  are reproduced
hereinunder:
“1. Notice of admission of case.—Any party to a suit may
give notice, by his pleading, or otherwise in writing, that he
admits the truth of the whole or any part of the case of any
other party.
 2. Notice to admit documents.—Either party may call upon
the other party  [to admit, within 7 [seven] days from the
date  of  service  of  the  notice  any  document,]  saving  all
exceptions; and in case of refusal or neglect to admit, after
such notice, the costs of proving any such document shall be
paid by the party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the
result of the suit may be, unless the Court otherwise directs;
and no costs of proving any document shall be allowed unless
such notice is given, except where the omission to give the
notice is, in the opinion of the Court, a saving of expense. 
[2A. Document to be deemed to be admitted if not denied
after  service  of  notice  to  admit  documents.—(1)  Every
document which a party is called upon to admit, if not denied
specifically or by necessary implication, or stated to be not
14admitted in the pleading of that party or in his reply to the
notice to admit documents, shall be deemed to be admitted
except as against a person under a disability: Provided that
the  Court  may,  in  its  discretion  and  for  reasons  to  be
recorded, require any document so admitted to be proved
otherwise  than  by  such  admission.  (2)  Where  a  party
unreasonably neglects or refuses to admit a document after
the service  on him of the notice to admit documents,  the
Court may direct him to pay costs to the other party by way
of compensation.] 
3. Form of notice.—A notice to admit documents shall be in
Form  No.  9  in  Appendix  C,  with  such  variations  as
circumstances may require. 
 [3A. Power of Court to record admission.—Notwithstanding
that no notice to admit documents has been given under rule
2, the Court may, at any stage of the proceeding before it, of
its own motion, call upon any party to admit any document
and shall, in such a case, record whether the party admits or
refuses or neglects to admit such document.] 
4. Notice to admit acts.—Any party may, by notice in writing,
at any time not later than nine days before the day fixed for
the  hearing,  call  on  any  other  party  to  admit,  for  the
purposes of the suit only, any specific fact or facts, mentioned
in such notice. And in case of refusal or neglect to admit the
same within six days after service of such notice, or within
such further time as may be allowed by the Court, the costs of
proving  such  fact  or  facts  shall  be  paid  by  the  party  so
neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the suit may be,
unless  the  Court  otherwise  directs:  Provided  that  any
admission made in pursuance of such notice is to be deemed
to be made only for the purposes of the particular suit, and
not as an admission to be used against the party on any other
occasion or in favour of any person other than the party
giving the notice.
155. Form of admissions. —A notice to admit facts shall be in
Form No. 10 in Appendix C, and admissions of facts shall be
in  Form  No.  11  in  Appendix  C,  with  such  variations  as
circumstances may require.
6. Judgment on admissions. —(1) Where admissions of fact
have been made either in the pleading or otherwise, whether
orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit,
either on the application of any party or of its own motion
and  without  waiting  for  the  determination  of  any  other
question between the parties, make such order or give such
judgment  as  it  may  think  fit,  having  regard  to  such
admissions. (2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under
sub-rule (1) a decree shall be drawn up in accordance with
the judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which the
judgment was pronounced”
Thus, the scheme of Order XII Rule 1 prescribes that any
party to a suit may give notice, by his pleading, or otherwise
in writing that he admits the truth of whole or any part of the
case to other party. As per Rule 2 of Order XII notice to admit
the documents may be given by either party to the other party
within the specified time for admission of a document and in
case of refusal or admission of the document after the notice,
the cost of proving such document shall be borne by the
party who neglects or refuse, which shall be based on the
discretion   of   the   Court.   Rule   2A   enables   the   deemed
admission if after notice the document has not been denied.
16The   said   notice   is   required   to   be   given   in   Form   No.9   of
Appendix ‘C’ of CPC. Rule 3A confers overriding powers to the
Court, that even in absence of a notice to admit a document
under Rule 2, the Court may record such admission on its
own motion or by calling upon a party. The Court also have a
power   to   record   whether   the   party   admits   or   refuses   or
neglect to admit such document. Rule 4 of Order XII relates
to notice to admit the facts. Any party may by a notice in
writing at any time not later than 9 days before the day fixed
for the hearing, call upon any other party to admit for the
purposes of suit only, any specific fact or facts, mentioned in
such notice that is required to be answered within a specified
time or within such further time as directed by the Court in
case of refusal or neglect to admit the same, the cost of
proving such fact or facts be paid by the parties as directed.
By adding a proviso, it was made clear that the admission, if
any, made in a proceeding would be relating to the same
proceeding not for any other proceedings. The notice under
Rule 4 is required to be given in Form No.10 of Appendix ‘C’
of CPC as prescribed in Rule 5. Rule 6 confers discretionary
17power to a Court who ‘may’ at any stage of the suit or suits
on the application of any party or in its own motion and
without   waiting   for   determination   of   any   other   question
between the parties makes such order or gives such judgment
as it may think fit having regard to such admission. 
16.Thus, legislative intent is clear by using the word ‘may’
and ‘as it may think fit’ to the nature of admission. The said
power is discretionary which should be only exercised when
specific,   clear   and   categorical   admission   of   facts   and
documents are on record, otherwise the Court can refuse to
invoke the power of Order XII Rule 6. The said provision has
been brought with intent that if admission of facts raised by
one side is admitted by other, and the Court is satisfied to the
nature of admission, then the parties are not compelled for
full­fledged trial and the judgment and order can be directed
without taking any evidence. Therefore, to save the time and
money of the Court and respective parties, the said provision
has been brought in the statute. As per above discussion, it is
clear that to pass a judgment on admission, the Court if
thinks fit may pass an order at any stage of the suit. In case
18the judgment is pronounced by the Court a decree be drawn
accordingly and parties to the case is not required to go for
trial. 
17.Some special provisions have been made in Rules 7, 8
and   9   regarding   affidavit   of   signature,   notice   to   produce
documents and also to the cost which may not have much
relevance to the facts of the present case hence, not being
discussed elaborately in this judgment. 
18.On the issue of discretion of Court to pass judgment on
admission, a three­Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
S.M. Asif v. Virendar Kumar Bajaj – (2015) 9 SCC 287
made the legislative intent clear to use the word ‘may’ which
clearly stipulates that the power under Order XII Rule 6 of
CPC is discretionary and cannot be claimed as a matter of
right. In the said case, the suit for eviction was filed by the
Respondent­Landlord   against   the   Appellant­Tenant.   The
relationship of tenancy was admitted including the period of
Lease Agreement. The Plaintiffs’ claim was resisted by the
Defendant setting up a plea that the property in question was
agreed to be sold by an agreement and the advance of Rs.
1982,50,000/­ was paid. The Defendant in course of taking the
defense   stoutly   denied   that   Respondent/Plaintiff   has
continued to be the landlord after entering into Agreement to
Sell. The suit for specific performance was also filed which of
course was contested by the Plaintiff. In the said case, this
Court was of the view that deciding such issues requires
appreciation of evidence. Mere relationship of landlord and
tenant cannot be said to be an unequivocal admission to
decree the suit under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC. Resultantly,
this Court by setting aside the judgment passed by the High
Court remitted the matter back to the Trial Court subject to
deposit of the arrears of the rent and the compensation for
use of occupation of the suit premises. Such deposit was
subject to final outcome of the eviction as well as suit for
specific performance. 
19.In the context of the said legal position, reverting to the
facts of the present case, it is apparent that the first Lease
Agreement was executed on 07.08.2011 on a monthly rent of
Rs.1,17,000/­ of a suit premises. The said Lease Agreement
was for a period of 02 years ending in July 2013. By the
20consent   of   the   parties   extended   Lease   Agreement   dated
07.08.2013 was executed for a further period of 11 months
for   a   monthly   rent   of   Rs.1,50,000/­   with   approximate
increase   in   rent   amount   by   30%   for   the   next   one   year.
Admittedly, the notice for eviction was issued terminating the
lease due to non­payment of the rent after the expiry of the
extended   lease   period   which   is   due   for   payment   by   the
Defendant. The suit for eviction was filed on 18.05.2018 for
possession (based on Landlord­Tenant relationship), arrears
of rent,   mesne profit   and  pendente lite . The said suit was
contested by the Defendant in which the ownership was not
denied.   The   execution   of   first   Lease   Agreement   dated
07.08.2011   and   the   extended   Lease   Agreement   dated
07.08.2013 was also not denied. The monthly tenancy and
payment of rent in terms of Lease Agreement is also not
denied by the Defendant. The Defendant has taken a defense
that the property belonging to him in  Amloh was agreed to be
sold to the Plaintiff to which effect ATS­II dated 25.05.2017
was executed. Further the Defendant has contended that,
ATS­III   dated   30.12.2017   was   executed   after   some
21adjustments   in   consideration   was   made.   Hence,   the
Defendant argued that on account of execution of the three
Agreements to Sell with respect to the suit property for a sum
of   Rs.   3,60,00,000/­,   the   relationship   of   Landlord­Tenant
ceased to exist and the Defendant acquired the status of the
owner as he has already parted with the possession of the
property under the Lease Agreement.
20.Learned   counsel   for   the   Appellant   has   placed   heavy
reliance on a judgment of   R. Kanthimathi (supra) . In the
said case, this Court has specified that any jural relationship
between two persons could be created through an agreement
and similarly could be changed through an agreement subject
to the limitations under the law. However, it is urged that the
relationship   of   the   Appellant   has   now   been   changed   to
purchaser on signing the ATS­I by landlord subsequent to
lease agreement, therefore the relationship of landlord and
tenant extinguishes. Reliance has also been placed on the
judgment of  Himani Alloys Limited (supra)  and it has been
urged by Appellant that in case the admission is not of the
amount as alleged and not categoric and clear, the decree
22under Order XII Rule 6 cannot be directed. The case of  Hari
Steel (supra)  has also been relied upon to contend that the
relief under Order XII Rule 6 is discretionary and the Court
should   not   deny   the   valuable   right   of   the   Defendant   to
contest the suit, meaning thereby, the discretion should be
used only when there is a clear, categorical and unconditional
admission and such right should not be exercised to deny
valuable right of a Defendant to contest the claim based on
defense   taken.   Further,   relying   upon   the   judgment   of
Shrimant   Shanrao   Suryavanshi   (supra) ,   it   has   been
contended that when a possession is with the Appellant by
virtue   of   a   part   performance   of   agreement   to   sell   as
prescribed under Section 53 of the Transfer of Property Act,
1882, he has right to defend or protect his possession. 
21.On the other hand, Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior
counsel,   placed   reliance   on   the   judgment   of   Nagindas
Ramdas (supra) , inter alia , contending that the admissions if
true and clear are the best proof of the fact admitted, it is
also   stated   the   admissions   in   the   pleadings   or   judicial
admissions admissible under Section 58 of the Evidence Act,
231872, made by the parties or their agents at or before hearing
of   the   case   stands   on   higher   footings   than   evidentiary
admissions. It is binding and constitute the waiver of proof.
Learned senior counsel further submits that the judgment of
R. Kanthimathi (supra)   is distinguishable with the present
case.   In   the   said   case,   after   referring   the   terms   of   the
agreement   it   reflected   that   the   major   amount   of   sale
consideration was paid and only Rs.5,000/­ was remaining to
be paid. Also, by conveyance the possession of property was
surrendered, therefore, Court said that the jural relationship
between the persons were changed by way of subsequent
agreement subject to the limitations under the law. While in
the   present   case   ATS­I   was   executed   on   22.04.2017.   In
clause 2 of the said agreement, it was specifically mentioned
“however, no advance – earnest money has been paid to the
first party ”. With respect to possession, it was mentioned that
it shall be handed over on spot. Thus, out of the total sale
consideration of Rs.3,60,00,000/­ nothing was paid and the
Appellant was in possession under the Lease Agreement as
tenant. The document Annexure P­1 (Advance Receipt­cum
24Agreement   to   Sale   &   Purchase)   produced   alongwith   the
paperbook   of   appeal   is   a   document   which   has   not   been
produced   before   the   lower   Court.   Thus,   vide   order   dated
07.10.2021, it was made clear by this Court that the said
document be deleted from the paperbook of this case. In view
of the said distinction drawn it was urged that judgment of  R.
Kanthimathi (supra)  is of no help to the Appellant.
22.Be that as it may, the arguments advanced by both the
sides, in our view can be appreciated by the Trial Court by
affording opportunity to them to lead evidence. As per the
pleadings, there may be admission to the extent of execution
of the Lease Agreement, rate of rent and monthly payment
but simultaneously the defense taken by the Defendant is
also based on ATS­I, II and III. In view of the contents of those
agreements and terms specified therein, the defense as taken
by the Appellant/Defendant is plausible or not is a matter of
trial which may be appreciated by the Court after granting
opportunity to lead evidence by the respective parties. There
may   be   admission   with   respect   to   tenancy   as   per   lease
agreements but the defense as taken is also required to be
25looked   into   by   the   Court   and   there   is   need   to   decide
justiciability of defense by the full­fledged trial. In our view,
for the purpose of Order XII Rule 6, the said admission is not
clear and categorical, so as to exercise a discretion by the
Court   without   dealing   with   the   defense   as   taken   by
Defendant. As we are conscious that any observation made
by this Court may affect the merit of either side, therefore, we
are not recording any finding either on the issue of tenancy or
with respect to the defense as taken by the Defendant. We are
only inclined to say whether the judgment and decree passed
in exercise of the power under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC is
based on clear and categorical admission. In our view, the
facts of the case in hand and the judgment in   S.M. Asif
(supra) are altogether similar, therefore, the ratio of the said
judgment rightly applies to the present case. Consequently,
the   judgment   and   decree   passed   by   the   Trial   Court,   as
confirmed   by   the   High   Court,   only   on   admission   of   fact
without considering the defense in exercise of power under
Order XII Rule 6 of CPC is hereby set­aside. The matter is
remitted   back   to   the   Trial   Court   to   decide   the   suit   as
26expeditiously  as  possible  affording  due  opportunity  to   the
parties to record evidence that shall be appreciated by the
Court on merit. 
23.In the present case, the tenant has not paid any amount
of rent w.e.f. 07.07.2014. In a suit based on Landlord­Tenant
relationship, the amount of rent and arrears thereof ought to
be paid in terms of the order of the Court. The said view is
fortified by the judgment of  S.M. Asif (supra) . As the Lease
Agreement   dated   07.08.2011   and   the   extended   Lease
Agreement dated 07.08.2013, which are not in dispute and
by the extended Lease Agreement, which was for one year,
the rent was increased for the year 2013­2014 by 30%. The
Defendant has not paid any rent till date though the period of
more than 7 years has already passed. Therefore, we direct
that   in   terms   of   the   admitted   fact   by   extended   Lease
Agreement and the increase in the percentage of rent, the
Trial Court shall first decide the issue of payment of monthly
rent applying the said increase on year to year basis and pass
appropriate orders for payment of arrears as well as deposit
of regular monthly rent. The said payment may be subject to
27outcome of the decision of the present suit as well as the suit
for   specific   performance   of   the   agreement   filed   by   the
Appellant.
24.Resultantly,   this   appeal   is   allowed   to   the   extent
indicated hereinabove and the order of High Court and Trial
Court is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the Trial
Court.
      ………..………………...J.
      (INDIRA BANERJEE)
      .….………………………J.
    (J.K. MAHESHWARI)
New Delhi:
July 06, 2022.
28