REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Civil Appeal Nos. 4578­4580 of 2022
(Arising out of S.L.P.(C) Nos.31186­88 of 2016)
KRISHNA RAI (Dead)           APPELLANT(S)
THROUGH LRs & ORS.
VERSUS
BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY
THROUGH REGISTRAR & ORS.  RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT
Vikram Nath, J.
 
1.Leave granted.
2.I.A.D.No.133982 of 2021 is allowed.
13.In these three Civil Appeals, this Court has
been called upon to decide whether principle of
estoppel   and   acquiescence   will   prevail   over
statutory service rules prescribing the procedure
for promotion of Class­IV employees to Class­III
working   in   the   Banaras   Hindu   University1,
Varanasi,   a   Central   University.   The   learned
Single Judge was of the view that the statutory
rules would prevail and must be strictly adhered
to,   whereas,   the   Division   Bench,   although,
agreeing with the reasoning of the learned Single
Judge that the procedure prescribed under the
rules was violated, still proceeded to set aside
the   judgment   of   the   learned   Single   Judge
applying   the   principle   of   estoppel   and
acquiescence   over   and   above   the   eligibility
1 BHU
2conditions having statutory force laid down by
the statutory rules.
4.The learned Single Judge had allowed the
writ petition filed by the  appellants and after
setting aside the promotion of respondent Nos.3
to 16, had directed the BHU to carry out the
exercise for promotion afresh as per the law and
the observations made in the said judgment. The
Division Bench allowed the appeal, set aside the
judgment   of   the   learned   Single   Judge   and
dismissed   the   writ   petition.   Aggrieved   by   the
same, the original writ petitioners are in appeal
before this Court.
5.Facts in brief are that for filling up 14 posts
of   Class­III   (Junior   Clerk   Grade)   by   way   of
promotion,   the   University   issued   a
3Notification/Advertisement   dated   17.12.2005
inviting   applications   from   permanent   Class­IV
employees for promotion as Junior Clerk in the
Pay­Scale   of   Rs.3050­4590.   The   eligibility
prescribed in the aforesaid Notification reads as
under:
“Eligibility:
All Class­IV employees, who have  put in five
years   services   and   who   have   passed
matriculation examination or equivalent will be
eligible for appointment as Junior Clerk under
25% promotion quota.
Such eligible candidates will be tested in:
A typing test in English/Hindi for a minimum of
30 words per minutes; and after qualifying in
the test.
Note: If an employee does not passed the typing
test   and   is   otherwise   eligible   for   promotion
he/she be promoted subject to the condition that
he/she passes the typing test within two years
from the date of his/her promotion failing which
he/she will be reverted.
Provided further that for such employees, typing
test be held at least twice a year.
4Two   papers   of   simple   English,   Hindi   and
Arithmetic of one hour duration.”
6.It would be worthwhile to mention here that
in   the   meantime,   it   was   resolved   to   hold   a
computer typing test on 20.04.2006. However,
upon   a   representation   being   made,   the   said
computer type test was deferred vide letter dated
19.04.2006 and, later vide communication dated
04.05.2006, it was informed that final merit list
would be based on the marks obtained in typing
test, written test and interview. The type test
could be taken on a computer or on a manual
type­writer.   The   typing   test   was   held   on
16.05.2006;   the   written   test   was   held   on
23.09.2006   and   interview   was   held   on
31.05.2007   and   01.06.2007.   Thereafter,   merit
list  was  prepared   by  the   Board  of  Examiners
appointed   for   making   the   selection/promotion
5and, accordingly, as per its recommendations,
14 selected candidates (respondent nos.3 to 16)
were issued appointment letters on 05.06.2007.
The   appellants   made   a  representation  against
the decision to appoint respondent nos.3 to 16,
which was rejected by the competent authority
on 02.07.2007.
7.Aggrieved, the appellants filed Writ Petition
No.37741   of   2007;   Sri   Krishna   Rai   and   33
others impleading the Banaras Hindu University
through its Registrar as respondent No.1, Vice­
Chancellor,   Banaras   Hindu   University   as
respondent No.2, and the 14 selected candidates
as respondent nos.3 to 16. The petition was filed
primarily   on   the   ground   that   the
Advertisement/Notification,   which   was   issued
6laying   down   the   eligibility   conditions,   as   per
paragraph 6.4 of the Manual did not provide for
any interview, but later on, changing the rules of
the   game   and   in   violation   of   the   eligibility
conditions laid down in para 6.4, the Board of
Examiners which did not have any authority or
power to amend paragraph 6.4 laying down the
eligibility   conditions   introduced   an   interview.
The Board of Examiners further laid down the
criteria for preparing the merit list out of total of
100   marks,   with   the   following   break­up:   20
marks for the type test, 60 marks for the written
test   of   Hindi,   English   and   Arithmetic   and   20
marks for the interview.
8.In the counter­affidavit filed by the BHU as
also by the respondent nos.3 to 16, the eligibility
7conditions   as   laid   down   in   para   6.4   of   the
Manual   and   duly   approved   by   the   Executive
Council, which is the supreme Authority, was
not   disputed.   Even   during   the   course   of   the
arguments, learned counsel for the BHU agreed
to   the   submission   of   the   appellants   that   the
Board of Examiners had no authority to alter the
eligibility conditions or the procedure prescribed
under   para   6.4   of   the   Manual.   It   is   further
undisputed   that  Board   of   Examiners   was  not
vested with any authority to alter the procedure
for promotion or in other words, it could not
amend para 6.4 of  the Manual. It is also an
admitted position that it is only the Executive
Council, which could have amended or modified
the procedure/eligibility prescribed under para
6.4 of the Manual.
89.The learned Single Judge after considering
the entire material on record and also the catena
of decisions relied upon by the respondent­BHU
and the private respondents was of the view that
the Board of Examiners committed grave error in
making   selections   by   awarding   marks   on   the
type test, written test and interview and then
preparing the merit list.
10.The learned Single Judge allowed the writ
petition. It quashed the orders impugned dated
05.06.2007   and   02.07.2007   as   also   the
appointments   of   respondent   Nos.3   to   16   on
Class­III post and further directed BHU to hold
fresh   selections   for   promotion   to   the   post   of
Class­III, complete the same expeditiously within
three   months,   strictly   in   accordance   with   the
9Rules   and   in   the   light   of   observations   made
above.   It   also   awarded   costs   quantified   at
Rs.50,000/. The operative part of the judgment
of   learned   Single   Judge   is   reproduced
hereunder:
“56. In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Impugned orders dated 5.6.2007 and 2.7.2007
and   appointments   of   respondents   3   to   16   on
Class IV posts are hereby quashed.
57.   The   University   is   directed   to   hold   fresh
selection for promotion to  the post of  Class III
against   the   vacancies   for   which   selection   was
held   by   notification   dated   17.12.2005   and
complete the same expeditiously and in any case,
within three months from the date of production
of   certified   copy   of   this   order   strictly   in
accordance   with   Rules   and   in   the   light   of
observations made above.
58.   Petitioners   are   entitled   to   costs   which   I
quantify to Rs. 50,000/­“.
11.The finding recorded by the learned Single
Judge as contained in paragraph Nos.53, 54 and
55 are also reproduced hereunder:
10“53.   In   the   present   case,   I   am   constrained   to
observe   that   the   notification   published   by
University   categorically   reiterated   what   was
contained in Clause 6.4 of the Manual. The rules of
game were made known to everybody but Board of
Examiners, which was constituted to hold selection
strictly   in   accordance   with   aforesaid   decided
norms, changed the rules in between the game and
held selection in a manner unknown to the extant
Rules  applicable   for promotion  from  Class   IV  to
Class   III   in   BHU.   This   was   wholly   illegal   and
without jurisdiction. It is well settled that rules of
games cannot be allowed to be changed during the
game.
54. This Court has no manner of doubt in the light
of   above   discussion   that   petitioners   have   been
discriminated   and   have   been   considered   in   a
manner   which   was   never   contemplated   by   the
University for considering promotion from Class IV
to Class III.
55.   One   more   aspect   also   not   be   ignored.   In
making such promotions persons totally unequal to
each   other   in   various   respects   have   to   be
considered.   A   Class   IV   employee   who   was
appointed in 1977 has much longer experience of a
Class IV post but in the context of personality and
other aspects, he may not compare with his much
junior   entered   in   service   as   Class   IV   employee
after   10,   20   or   25   years.   The   subsequent
11educational advancement also cannot be ignored.
It is evident that persons who were appointed in
1977   to   1997,   i.e.   petitioners,   got   occasion   for
consideration for promotion to Class III post after
decades   of   service.   For   such   persons,   making
interview as a part of selection when it was not
contemplated in the relevant procedure prescribed
by   the   University   obviously   made   it   difficult   for
them to qualify since they may not compete with
young and youngest new employees having better
qualifications. But one must also have considered
that they at the fag end of service to their credit,
have long experience. Better honour and respect
needed so that they may retire from a higher post
after getting at least one promotion at the fag end
of their service. The University must have all these
facts and other relevant aspects in mind when laid
down   the   procedure   in   the   Manual,   but
unfortunately   the   Board   of   Examiners   acted
unmindful   of   wider   aspects.   The   acted   wholly
illegally by ignoring the established procedure laid
down in the Rules and on the contrary settled their
own   selection   procedure   by   exceeding   their
authority and jurisdiction. ”
12. BHU as also the private respondent nos. 3 to
16   preferred   intra­court   Appeals   registered   as
12Special Appeal No.24 of 2012 (Banaras Hindu
University and another Vs. Sri Krishna Rai and
others), Special Appeal No.9 of 2012 (Shri Sarvjit
Singh and others Vs. Sri Krishna Rai and others)
and Special Appeal No.25 of 2012 (Ram Kishore
Pandey   and   others   Vs.   Banaras   Hindu
University and others). The Division Bench vide
judgment dated 29.07.2016 was of the view, as
already stated above, that the appellants having
appeared in the examination process as also the
interview   without   any   protest,   upon   being
unsuccessful   could   not   have   challenged   the
selection   process.   The   Division   Bench   relied
upon   a   number   of   decisions,   which   we   shall
shortly   discuss,   in   support   of   its   view   and
accordingly   allowed   the   Special   Appeals,   set
13aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge
and dismissed the writ petition.
13.Having   heard   learned   counsel   for   the
parties   and   having   perused   the   material   on
record as also the case laws relied upon by the
learned counsel for the parties, we now proceed
to deal with the issue at hand. 
14.As   per   para   6.4   of   the   Manual   duly
approved by the Executive Council’s Resolution
No.223 dated 2/3rd of November, 1980, all Class­
IV employees, who have put in five years’ service
and who have passed matriculation examination
or equivalent, would be eligible for promotion to
the  post of Junior Clerk Grade. Such  eligible
candidates would be tested in a typing test in
English/Hindi for a minimum speed of 30 words
per minute. The note appended to such Clause
14of typing test mentions that if an employee does
not pass the typing test and is otherwise eligible
for promotion, he be promoted subject to the
condition that he passes the typing test within
two years from the date of his promotion failing
which, he would be reverted. The note further
provided that for such employees the typing test
would   be   held   twice   a   year.   Para   6.4(ii)(b)
provided   that   two   papers   of   simple   English,
Hindi   and   Arithmetic   of   one   hour   duration
would be held.
15.The Executive Council vide its Resolution
No.131   dated   29/30.03.1996   had   raised   the
vacancies   from   20%   to   25%   for   promotion   of
Group­D   in­service   employees   and   it   further
provided   that   the   seniority   list   would   be
prepared   after   passing   the   departmental   test
15and   it   further   provided   that   no   relaxation   in
prescribed   qualification   shall   be   given   for   in­
service employees.
16.The net effect of the above eligibility and
procedure prescribed for promotion of Group­D
Class­IV employees to the cadre of Junior Clerk
would be that­ (1) a type test would be held with
a minimum speed of 30 words per minute in
Hindi/English.   This   type   test   was   not
mandatorily required to be qualified and even
those eligible candidates, who could not qualify
the type test, but were otherwise eligible having
passed   in   the   departmental   test,   would   be
allowed two years’ time after joining to qualify
the typing test and for such candidates, typing
test would be held twice a year.
1617.The only test required for eligible candidates
was to pass in the departmental test i.e. the test
of simple English, Hindi and Arithmetic. Thus, if
an eligible candidate passes in the written test of
simple English, Hindi and Arithmetic and also
passes in the type test, would be entitled to be
placed   in   the   seniority   list   for   promotion.   It
further   mandated   that   even   where   eligible
candidates   had   passed   in   the   departmental
written   test   of   simple   English,   Hindi   and
Arithmetic, but could not pass in the typing test,
would   still   be   eligible   for   promotion   and   be
placed   in   the   seniority   list   with   a   rider   that
he/she   would   have   to   qualify   the   typing   test
within two years and such typing test for these
promoted candidates would be held twice a year,
that is to say that they would have at least four
17chances   of   appearing   in   the   typing   test   and
qualifying it subsequent to their promotion.
18.In the present case, the Board of Examiners
comprising of large number of Members changed
the   entire   procedure   and   they   established   a
completely   new   procedure.   They   awarded   20
marks   for   the   type   test   treating   it   to   be
compulsory,   60   marks   for   the   written
departmental test of simple English, Hindi and
Arithmetic with 20 marks for each subject and
further   introduced   an   interview   of   20   marks.
Thus, the merit list was to be prepared on the
total 100 marks as distributed above.
19.There is neither any provision nor any other
indication in the Manual duly approved by the
Executive Council for preparing such a merit list
based upon the marks awarded under different
18heads. The promotion was to be made on the
basis   of   seniority   subject   to   passing   the
departmental   written   test,   once   the   candidate
was   eligible   having   five   years’   experience   in
Class­IV   and   matriculation   certificate   or
equivalent. The intention and object as culled
out from the aforesaid eligibility procedure was
that, seniority subject to qualifying the written
test would be the criteria for promotion.
20.The   Board   of   Examiners   on   their   own
changed the criteria and made it purely merit
based   by   introducing   an   interview   and   also
preparing the merit list on the basis of marks
awarded   in   the   type   test,   written   test   and
interview. As per the provisions of Clause 6.4 of
the   Manual,   type   test   was   not   mandatory.
Anybody who would fail in the type test, could
19also be promoted subject to the rider that they
would have to qualify the type test within two
years from his joining.
21.What we notice is that, the Division Bench
approved   the   reasoning   of   the   learned   Single
Judge. The relevant extract of the judgment of
the Division Bench is reproduced below:
“Learned Single Judge as already noted above has
rightly proceeded to observe that interview was not
at all subscribed by the provisions holding the field.
We   are   also   of   the   same   view   that   procedure
prescribed ought to have  been adhered to by the
Board of Examiners. Board of Examiners on their
own could not have changed the procedure already
holding   the   field   as   laid   down   by   the   Executive
Council.”
22.However, the Division Bench fell in error in
applying   the   principle   of   estoppel   that   the
appellants having appeared in the interview and
being unsuccessful proceeded to challenge the
same   and   on   that   ground   alone,   allowed   the
20appeals, set­aside the judgment of the learned
Single   Judge.   The   Division   Bench   having
approved   the   reasoning   of   the   learned   Single
Judge,   ought   not   to   have   interfered   in   the
judgment   of   the   learned   Single   Judge   on   a
technical plea. The Division Bench ought to have
considered   that   the   appellants   were   Class­IV
employees   working   from   1977   onwards   and
expecting   from   them   to   have   raised   serious
objection or protest at the stage of interview and
understanding   the   principles   of   changing   the
Rules   of   the   game,   was   too   far­fetched,
unreasonable and unwarranted.
23.The case laws relied upon by the Division
Bench would have no application in the facts of
the present case as none of the judgments relied
upon   by   the   Division   Bench   laid   down   that
21principle of estoppel would be above law. It is
settled   principle   that   principle   of   estoppel
cannot   override   the   law.   The   manual   duly
approved by the Executive Council will prevail
over   any   such   principle   of   estoppel   or
acquiescence.
24.The   Division   Bench   relied   upon   the
following judgments:
(1)Union   of   India   and   another   Vs.  N.
Chandrashekharan and others2.
(2)Utkal University and others  Vs.  Dr. N.C.
Sarangi and others3.
(3)Chandra Prakash Tiwari  Vs. Shakuntala4 .
(4)K.A. Nagmani  Vs. Indian Airlines5.
(5)Madan   Lal   and   others   Vs.  State   of
Jammu and Kashmir and others6.
2 JT 1998(1) SC 295
3 JT 1999 (1) SC 101.
4 2002 (6) SCC 127
5 2009 (5) SCC 515
6 1995(3) SCC 486
2225.In the case of   Chandrashekharan  (supra),
the plea taken by the unsuccessful candidates
was that the marks prescribed for interview and
confidential reports were disproportionately high
and the authorities could not fix a minimum to
be   secured   either   in   interview   or   in   the
assessment   of   annual   confidential   reports.   In
the above case, there was no violation of any
statutory rules or the eligibility determined by
the rule making authority.
26.In the case of  Utkal University  (supra),  the
objection taken by the unsuccessful candidates
was   with   regard   to   the   composition   of   the
Selection Committee. This again would not have
any application to the facts of the present case.
27.In   the   case   of   Chandra   Prakash   Tiwari
(supra), the unsuccessful candidate did not find
23the   result   of   the   interview   palatable   and   the
objection taken was that the process of interview
was unfair. This also has no application to the
facts of the present case.
28.In the case of   K.A. Nagmani  (supra),   the
unsuccessful   candidates   were   given   equal
opportunity   and   no   violation   of   any  statutory
rule was alleged, as such, this judgment would
also have no application.
29.In the case of  Madan Lal  (supra),  again the
objection taken by the unsuccessful candidate
was   regarding   the   process   of   interview   being
unfair.   This   case   also   does   not   have   any
application to the facts of the present case.
30.On the contrary, what we find is that, in the
case of  Dr. Krushna Chandra Sahu and others
24Vs.  State of Orissa and others7, it has been
held   that   the   suitability  criteria   is   to   be   laid
down by the rule making authority and that the
selection   criteria   cannot   be   laid   down   by   the
Selection   Board/Selection   Committee   unless
specifically   authorized.   In   the   present   case,
firstly, there was no authorization to the Board
of Examiners to lay down the selection criteria
and   further   there   was   clear   violation   of   the
suitability criteria laid down by the rule making
authority. Paragraph nos. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and
36   of   the   said   judgment   are   reproduced
hereunder:
“31.   Now,   power   to   make   rules   regulating   the
conditions   of   service   of   persons   appointed   on
Govt. Posts is available to the Governor of the
State under the Proviso to  Article 309  and it was
in exercise of this power that the present rules
were   made.   If   the   statutory   Rules,   in   a   given
7 1995 (6) SCC 1
25case,   have   not   been   made,   either   by   the
Parliament or the State Legislature, or, for that
matter, by the Governor of the State, it would be
open to the appropriate Government (the Central
Government   under   Article   73   and   the   State
Government under  Article 162 ) to issue executive
instructions.   However,   if   the   Rules   have   been
made but they are silent on any subject or point
in issue, the omission can be supplied and the
rules   can   be   supplemented   by   executive
instructions. (See: Sant Ram Sharma V. State of
Rajasthan).
32.   In   the   instant   case,   the   Government   did
neither issue any administrative instruction nor
did   it   supply   the   omission   with   regard   to   the
criteria on the basis of which suitability of the
candidates was to be determined. The members
of the Selection Board, of their own, decided to
adopt   the   confidential   character   rolls   of   the
candidates   who   were   already   employed   as
Homoeopathic Medical Officers, as the basis for
determining their suitability.
33. The members of the Selection Board or for
that matter, any other Selection Committee, do
not have the jurisdiction to lay down the criteria
for   selection   unless   they   are   authorised
specifically   in   that   regard   by   the   rules   made
under  Article 309.   It is basically the function of
the Rule making authority to provide the basis for
26selection. this Court in   State of Andhra Pradesh
and Anr. v. V. Sadanandam and Ors  observed as
under: (SCC pp. 583­84, para 17):
“We are now only left with the reasoning of the
Tribunal   that   there   is   no   justification   for   the
continuance   of   the   old   rule   and   for   personnel
belonging   to   either   zone   being   transferred   on
promotion to offices in other zones. In drawing
such   conclusion,   the   Tribunal   has   travelled
beyond the limits of its jurisdiction. We need only
point out that the mode of recruitment and the
category from which the recruitment to a service
should   be   made   are   all   matters   which   are
exclusively within the domain of the executive. It
is not for judicial bodies to sit in judgment over
the wisdom of the executive in choosing the mode
of recruitment of the categories from which the
recruitment should be made as they are matters
of  policy decision  falling exclusively within the
purview of the executive.” (Emphasis supplied).
34. The Selection Committee does not even have
the inherent jurisdiction to lay down the norms
for selection nor can such power be assumed by
necessary implication. In P.K. Ramachandra lyer
and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors . (SCC pp. 180­
81 para 44) , it was observed :
“By   necessary   inference,   there   was   no   such
power   in   the   ASRB   to   add   to   the   required
qualifications. If such power is claimed, it has to
27be   explicit   and   cannot   be   read   by   necessary
implication   for   the   obvious   reasons   that   such
deviation   from   the   rules   is   likely   to   cause
irreparable and irreversible harm”.
35. Similarly, in Umesh Chandra Shukla Etc. v.
Union of India and Ors. it was observed that the
Selection   Committee   does   not   possess   any
inherent power to lay down its own standards in
addition to what is prescribed under the Rules.
Both   these   decisions   were   followed   in
Durgacharan Misra v. State of Orissa and  Ors
and   the   limitation   of   the   Selection   Committee
were  pointed  out  that it  had  no  jurisdiction to
prescribe the minimum marks which a candidate
had to secure at the viva­voce test.
36.     It   may   be   pointed   out   that   rule   making
function under   Article 309   is legislative and not
executive as was laid down by this Court in  B.S.
Yadav and Ors. v. State of Haryana and Ors . For
this reason also, the Selection Committee or the
Selection   Board   cannot   be   held   to   have
jurisdiction to lay down any standard or basis for
selection as it would amount to legislating a rule
of selection.”
31.Further in the case of  Tata Chemicals Ltd.
Vs.  Commissioner   of   Customs   (preventive),
28Jamnagar8, it has been laid down that there can
be no estoppel against law. If the law requires
something to be done in a particular manner,
then it must be done in that manner, and if it is
not done in that manner, then it would have no
existence in the eye of the law. Paragraph 18 of
the said judgment is reproduced below:
“18. The Tribunal’s judgment has proceeded on the basis
that even though the samples were drawn contrary to law,
the   appellants   would   be   estopped   because   their
representative was present when the samples were drawn
and they did not object immediately. This is a completely
perverse finding both on fact and law. On fact, it has been
more   than   amply   proved   that   no   representative   of   the
appellant was, in fact, present at the time the Customs
Inspector   took   the   samples.   Shri   K.M.   Jani   who   was
allegedly present not only stated that he did not represent
the Clearing Agent of the appellants in that he was not
their employee but also stated that he was not present
when the samples were taken. In fact, therefore, there was
no representative of the appellants when the samples were
taken. In law equally the Tribunal ought to have realized
that   there   can   be   no   estoppel   against   law.   If   the   law
requires that something be done in a particular manner, it
must   be   done   in   that   manner,   and   if   not   done   in   that
manner  has no  existence in  the eye  of law  at all.  The
Customs Authorities are not absolved from following the
8 2015 (11) SCC 628
29law   depending   upon   the   acts   of   a   particular   assessee.
Something   that   is   illegal   cannot   convert   itself   into
something legal by the act of a third person.”
32.For   all   the   reasons   recorded   above,   the
appeals   deserve   to   be   allowed.   They   are,
accordingly,  allowed.
33.The   impugned   judgment   of   the   Division
Bench dated 29.07.2016 is set aside and the
judgment   of   the   learned   Single   Judge   dated
26.08.2011 is restored.
34.We have been informed that some of the
appellants have retired and a couple of them
have also died, post retirement. Rest of them are
still   working.   Since   the   examinations   have
already been held in the year 2006­07, all the
appellants   who   are   found   to   be   eligible   for
promotion   as   per   the   existing   rules   and   as
directed by the learned Single Judge, would be
30extended   all   consequential   benefits.     Further,
where   the   appellants   have   died,   the   benefit
would be extended to their legal heirs entitled
under law for the same.
35.Pending   application(s),   if   any,   is/are
disposed of. 
…………..........................J.
[DINESH MAHESHWARI]
………….........................J.
[VIKRAM NATH]
NEW DELHI
JUNE 16, 2022. 
31