NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
    CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4569 OF 2022
          (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 2956 of 2022)
UNION OF INDIA ….APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
K. RAJASHEKHARA REDDY AND ANOTHER ….RESPONDENT(S)
J U D G M E N T
Rastogi, J.
1.Leave granted.
2.The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
6th April, 2021 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad for the
State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh while setting aside the
order of the Central Administrative Tribunal  dated 5th September, 2017
directing the present appellant to conduct re-medical examination of the
1respondent-applicant  and  take  consequential  steps  thereafter  within  a
period of four weeks.
3.Briefly  stated,  facts  relevant  for  the  purpose  are  that  the  Civil
Services Examination, 2014 (hereinafter being referred to as the “CSE
2014”) was notified by the Union Public Service Commission (hereinafter
being referred to as the “UPSC”) on 31st May, 2014 holding recruitment to
24 participating services including IAS, IFS, IPS, Central Civil Services
Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts.
4.In response to the notification dated 31st May 2014, the respondent-
applicant  had  also  participated  in  the  selection  process  and  on  being
successful  in  the  preliminary  examination,  appeared  in  the  main
examination held in December, 2014 and after qualifying the same, was
called for an interview scheduled on 2nd June 2015.  On 3rd June 2015, the
respondent-applicant attended the medical examination at B.R. Ambedkar
Hospital,  New  Delhi  and  the  medical  report  of  the  respondent  was
uploaded on the website of the Department on 17th June 2015.  However, in
the said medical report, it was opined that the required Body Mass Index (in
short  “BMI”)  should  be  not  more  than  30  but  since  the  BMI  of  the
respondent-applicant was 32, he was declared ‘temporarily unfit’.
25.The  result  of  the  Civil  Services  (Main)  Examinations,  2014  was
declared on 4th July, 2015 recommending 1236 candidates in their order of
merit for appointment to various All India Services for Group ‘A’ and ‘B’
posts.  However, the name of the respondent-applicant was not shown in
the main list.  The consolidated reserve list was later published on 19th
January, 2016 in accordance with Rule 16(4) and 16(6) of the Civil Services
Examination  Rules  in  the  order  of  merit  the  name  of  the  respondent-
applicant was shown at Sl. No. 16.  Immediately thereafter, in terms of the
order of their merit in the reserve list, candidates were considered for
allotment to various Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ services on 9th March 2016.
The  respondent-applicant  at  this  stage  made  a  representation  on  10th
March, 2016 with the request that he is now medically fit and willing to take
a re-medical examination (which admittedly was beyond the period of six
months), that request was not acceded to by the competent authority, that
became the cause of grievance for filing an application before the Central
Administrative Tribunal by the respondent-applicant.
6.The learned Tribunal, in the first instance, by an interim order dated
17th August,  2016  directed  the  appellant  to  send  him  for  re-medical
examination.  Because of non-compliance, a contempt petition was also
filed  by the  respondent-applicant  but the  fact is neither the  re-medical
3examination  was  conducted  nor  any  action  was  further  taken  by  the
applicant in compliance of the interim order of the learned Tribunal.  
7.However, the OA was finally heard and dismissed by the Tribunal by
an order dated 5th September, 2017 on the premise that the medical report
of the respondent-applicant was uploaded declaring him to be ‘temporarily
unfit’ on 17th June, 2015 and since no efforts were made for making an
application for re-medical examination within the stipulated period of six
months and for the first time, application was filed by him on 10th March,
2016 which was beyond the period of six months in terms of Rule 7(a)(vi) of
Appendix-III of the CSE Rules, 2014 and his BMI was more than 30 and
that being the factual matrix, the Tribunal was of the view that it may not be
possible to come to the rescue of the respondent-applicant and dismissed
the application.
8.The order of the Tribunal dated 5th September, 2017 became the
subject matter of challenge at the instance of respondent-applicant by filing
of a writ petition before the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.  However, there was no dispute on facts but the High
Court,  on  re-appreciation  of  the  material  on  record  and  taking  into
consideration the scheme of the CSE Rules 2014 and Rule 7(a)(vii) of
Appendix-III of the CSE Rules 2014, in particular, took note of the fact that
4though the medical examination report was uploaded on 17th June, 2015
and the respondent-applicant approached for re-medical examination for
the first time on 10th March, 2016 after a period of six months from 17th
June, 2015 and arrived at the conclusion that the name of the respondent-
applicant appeared for the first time in the consolidated reserve list on 19th
January, 2016 at Sl. No. 16 and within the stipulated period of six months,
he made a representation on 10th March, 2016 for re-medical examination
and took note of the word ‘ordinarily’ as referred to under Rule 7(a)(vii) of
Appendix-III of the CSE Rules, 2014 and held that the word ‘ordinarily’
indicates  that  in  such  special  cases,  discretion  can  be  exercised  for
relaxation and granted benefit of extension to the respondent-applicant.
Accordingly,  while  setting  aside  the  order  of  the  Tribunal  dated  5th
September 2017,  the High  Court directed  the appellant to conduct re-
medical  examination  of  the  respondent-applicant  and  take  further
consequential steps thereafter within a period of four weeks under the
judgment dated 6th April, 2021 that became a subject matter of challenge at
the instance of Union of India by filing appeal before this Court.
9.The submission of Mr. Balbir Singh, learned ASG appearing for the
appellant  is  that  the  medical  report  of  the  respondent-applicant  was
uploaded on 17th June, 2015 in terms of Rule 7(a)(vii) of Appendix-III of the
5CSE Rules, 2014 which clearly indicates that such of the candidates who
are  declared  ‘temporarily  unfit’,  the  period  specified  for  re-medical
examination should not ordinarily exceed six months at the maximum and
according to him, the representation for the first time, was submitted by the
respondent-applicant on 10th March, 2016 which was admittedly beyond the
period of six months.  In the given circumstances, re-medical examination
at the later stage was not permissible and the manner in which discretion
has been exercised by the High Court under the impugned judgment, if
made permissible, will always be abused and submits that the outer limit
has been fixed for six months and the word ‘ordinarily’ has to be read
conjointly with the word ‘maximum’ to be exercised only in exceptional
cases such as in the case of the pregnant female candidate who is unable
to complete a medical examination within a period of six months. In the
given facts and circumstances, the interference made by the High Court
under the order of the Tribunal is not legally sustainable and deserves to be
interfered with by this Court.
10. Shri Nikhil Swami, learned counsel for the respondents, on the other
hand, while supporting the finding recorded by the High Court submits that
it was the last attempt of the respondent-applicant which he had availed
while participating in the selection process initiated in the year 2014 and
6prior thereto, upto the year 2013, there was a stipulation that the medical
report was being sent to the candidate individually and it was for the first
time in the selection process of the year 2014, it was dispensed with.
Although the facts in reference to publication of list being uploaded of his
medical examination on 17th June, 2015 is not disputed by him.  
11.Learned counsel further submits that his name was not included in
the main list published on 4th July 2015, as such, he could not take any
steps and it was only in the consolidated reserve list published on 19th
January 2016, that his name was placed at Sl. No. 16 and the allotment
was made to Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ services in allocation list on 9th March,
2016 and without any loss of time, representation was made by him on 10th
March,  2016  to  the  Secretary,  DoPT  along  with  the  medical  fitness
certificate dated 24th February, 2016 with a request to the authorities to
consider his case for re-medical examination at the earliest but that was not
acceded to by the department.
12.Learned counsel further submits that even the Tribunal, at one stage,
came to his rescue and passed an interim order directing the authorities to
send him for re-medical examination by an order dated 17th August 2016.
In the given circumstances, the word ‘ordinarily’ which has been interpreted
by the High Court under the impugned judgment dated 6th April, 2021 being
7a special case of the respondent-applicant and the discretion has been
exercised by the High Court is to do justice with the respondent-applicant
particularly, in the peculiar facts and circumstances where he has been
declared to be medically fit, not only at the stage when the representation
was submitted by him on 10th March, 2016 but also thereafter and being his
last attempt, discretion has been judiciously exercised by the High Court
under the impugned judgment and needs no interference.
13.We  have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  and  with  their
assistance perused the material available on record.
14.The  facts  are  not  in  dispute.   The  respondent-applicant  had
participated in the CSE, 2014 pursuant to notification dated 31st May, 2014
which  was  his  fifth  and  the  final  attempt.   After  qualifying  preliminary
examination followed with the main examination, he appeared for interview
held on 2nd June, 2015 and awaiting the final select list of the candidates,
who had participated in the selection process where each one has to get
himself medically examined.  So far as the present respondent-applicant is
concerned, he was sent for medical examination on 3rd June, 2015 at B.R.
Ambedkar Hospital, New Delhi and his medical report was uploaded by the
Department on its website on 17th June 2015.  In the medical report, it was
8opined that the required BMI should not be more than 30 but the BMI of the
respondent-applicant was 32 as such he was declared ‘temporarily unfit’. 
15.Thereafter, on 4th July 2015, the final list of the CSE,  2014 was
declared recommending 1236 candidates in the order of their merit for
appointment to various services of Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ but the name of
the respondent-applicant was not included in the final list.  However, later
when the consolidated reserve list came to be published on 19th January,
2016 in terms of Rules 16(4) and (5) of the CSE Rules in the order of merit,
the name of the respondent-applicant figured at Sl. No. 16.  Thereafter, the
competent authority allotted Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ services to various
candidates on 9th March, 2016 including those who were lower in the order
of merit in consolidated reserve list.  At this stage, the respondent-applicant
made representation on 10th March, 2016 with his medical fitness report
showing his willingness to take re-medical examination and requested the
authorities  to  consider  his  case  for  re-medical  examination  admittedly
which was beyond the stipulated period of six months from 17th June 2015.
Since it was declined by the authorities, that was the grievance which made
him to approach the Tribunal.
16.This Court, by an Order dated 6th April 2021 directed the appellant to
conduct the re-medical examination and submit a report to this Court in a
9sealed cover.  In compliance of the order of this Court, the re-medical
examination  of  the  respondent-applicant  has  been  conducted  by  the
medical Board of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital, Delhi on 12th May,
2022 and the medical report along with the enclosure dated 12th May, 2022
has been furnished to this Court where he has been found to be medically
fit for all services.
17.The provision manifests that in case of a candidate who is declared
‘temporarily unfit’, the re-medical fitness certificate in terms of the provision
has to be furnished within six months from the date on which the candidate
was declared to be ‘temporarily unfit’.
18.In this regard, it is relevant to refer Rule 7(a)(vii) of Appendix-III of the
CSE Rules 2014, which states as under:-
“In case of candidate who is to be declared “Temporary Unfit”, the
period  specified  for  re-examination  should  not  ordinarily  exceed  six
months at the maximum.  On re-examination after the specified period
these candidates should not be declared temporarily unfit for a further
period but a final decision in regard to their fitness for appointment or
otherwise should be given.”
19.Rule 7(a)(vii) of Appendix-III of the CSE Rules 2014 clearly indicates
that such of the candidates who are declared ‘temporarily unfit’, the period
specified  for  re-medical  examination  is  ordinarily  six  months  at  the
maximum from the date of uploading of the medical examination report on
the website of the Department.  No communication by the Department
10regarding  findings  of  the  Department  is  communicated  individually  and
uploading takes place only by the Medical Board.
20.Indisputedly, in the present case, the medical examination report was
published on 17th June, 2015 indicating the respondent-applicant to be
‘temporarily unfit’ and this is an admitted fact that the respondent-applicant
approached for re-medical examination for the first time on 10th March,
2016, i.e., after six months of the medical examination report uploaded on
17th June 2015.  The details regarding the number of such candidates for
CSE-2014 to CSE-2020 who are declared medically unfit has also been
provided to this Court.  It may be noticed that in CSE-2014, there were 10
candidates including the respondent-applicant, declared temporarily unfit
and in overall table for CSE-2014 to CSE-2020 indicates that there are 25
candidates  who  are  declared  temporarily  unfit  failed  to  submit  an
application within a stipulated time of six months after being declared as
‘temporarily unfit’ and have not been allocated to any services in terms of
the scheme of Rules of which a reference is made.  The details regarding
number of such candidates for CSE-2014 to CSE-2020 are as under:-
Sl.
No.CSE Year Number of candidates who were not allocated to
any Service as they failed to submit medical fitness
against temporarily unfit status within the prescribed
limit
111. CSE-2014                           10
2. CSE-2015                           01
3. CSE-2016                           07
4. CSE-2017                           00
5. CSE-2018                           01
6. CSE-2019                           02
7. CSE-2020                            04
21. We are also of the view that the period of six months which has been
stipulated under Rule 7(a)(vii) of Appendix III of CSE Rules, 2014 of which
reference has been made, the word ‘ordinarily’ has to be conjointly read
with the word ‘maximum’ during which the candidate has to approach for
re-medical  examination  from  the  date  of  uploading  of  the  medical
examination report on the website of the Department which indicates an
outer  limit  of  six  months  during  which  it  is  open  to  the  candidate  to
approach for re-medical examination after being declared ‘temporarily unfit’
from the date of the uploading of the medical examination report on the
website of the Department and the fate of medical fitness is not dependent
upon the result of the selection process held by the Commission.
22. At the same time, there may be a situation as being projected by the
appellant to this Court that in special cases where a pregnant lady may not
be in a position and is unable to complete her medical examination within a
period of six months, in the peculiar circumstances, the word ‘ordinarily’
may be considered for relaxation to a limited extent but the kind of excuse
12which has been projected by the respondent-applicant that though he was
found to be temporarily unfit but the consolidated reserve list was published
on 19th January, 2016 where his name was placed at Sl. No. 16 and
allotment  to  Group  ‘A’ services  was  published  on  9th March,  2016,  he
immediately filed an application on 10th March, 2016, without loss of time,
which was within the prescribed period of six months from the date of
publication of the reserve list, in our considered view, is neither a valid
justification  nor  is  in  conformity  with  the  scheme  of  Rules  of  which  a
reference has been made.
23.In our considered view, the word ‘ordinarily’ in isolation as interpreted
by  the  High  Court  without  taking  recourse  to  the  word  ‘maximum’ as
referred, is not sustainable in law.
24.It is true that the case of the respondent-applicant on legal foundation
is not sustainable but we are constrained to observe that it was the fifth and
last attempt of the respondent-applicant during which he appeared in CSE,
2014 and it is not disputed that before the year 2014, examinations which
were  conducted  by  the  appellant,  medical  report  was  always  made
available to the individual candidate and it is only for the first time in the
year 2014, this clause was inserted where the medical reports are being
uploaded on the website of the Department which was considered to be the
13notice to all the candidates who had participated in the selection process
which might have created some confusion with the respondent-applicant
and once his name found place in the consolidated reserve list in January
2016, he made a representation on 10th March, 2016 along with his medical
fitness  certificate,  and  after  the  orders  of  this  Court,  the  respondent-
applicant has again been sent for re-medical examination and has been
found “medically fit for all services” as it reveals from the medical report
dated 12th May, 2022.
25.In the given circumstances, this Court, while exercising its plenary
power under Article 142 of the Constitution, to do complete justice, consider
it appropriate to direct that based on the re-medical fitness report, the
appellant  may  consider  the  case  of  the  respondent-applicant  for
appointment as per his placement in the consolidated reserve list originally
published of CSE, 2014 on 19th January, 2016, subject to police verification,
with  all  notional  benefits  including  seniority,  pay  scale  and  other
consequential benefits but not the actual salary for the period for which he
has not worked, within a period of four weeks from today.
26.Consequently, the appeal succeeds and is allowed.  The judgment of
the High Court impugned dated 6th April, 2021 is accordingly quashed and
set aside with the observations made above.  No costs.
1427.Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……………………..J.
(AJAY RASTOGI)
………………………J.
(VIKRAM NATH)
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 14, 2022
15