Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.485 OF 2012
UTTAM                                        .… APPELLANT
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                       …. RESPONDENT
   
J U D G M E N T
HIMA KOHLI, J.
1. The present appeal is directed against the judgment dated 26th July, 2010 passed by
the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay at Nagpur Bench.  The High Court has
dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant against the judgment and order dated 29th
April, 1997 passed by the 8th Additional Sessions Judge, Nagpur, convicting him for the offence
under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 18601 and sentencing him to suffer imprisonment
for life with a fine of ₹1,000/- (Rupees one thousand) and in default thereof, to suffer simple
imprisonment for a period of three months.
1 for short ‘IPC’
Page 1 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
2. The case set up by the prosecution is that the deceased, Pushpabai and the appellant
had got married on 19th March, 1994.  There was no issue from the marriage.  The appellant
was a T.V. Mechanic.  It was alleged that the appellant was having an illicit relationship with a
widow residing near their house, namely, Kusum Gaikwad.  On 26th March, 1995, the appellant
and Kusum Gaikwad went to watch a movie.  When he returned home in the evening hours, he
was confronted by his wife for having gone to watch a movie with Kusum Gaikwad.  The
appellant quarrelled with Pushpabai and told her that Kusum Gaikwad was his paramour.  He
had also beaten Pushpabai. On the very next day, i.e., on 27th March, 1995, between 11.00
a.m. and noon, the appellant had again picked up a quarrel with Pushpabai and he told her
that he would not leave Kusum Gaikwad. On Pushpabai demanding a divorce, the appellant
lost his temper and assaulted her.   Thereafter, he poured kerosene on his wife and set her on
fire by lighting a match stick.  At this, the appellant’s brother rushed to extinguish the fire by
pouring water on her.   Pushpabai sustained severe burn injuries on her face, breast, stomach,
both hands and legs.  She was taken for treatment to Mayo Hospital, Nagpur where she
succumbed to her injuries on 31st March, 1995.  
3. The information about the aforesaid incident was communicated by Mayo Police Booth,
Nagpur to the Investigating Officer2 Sub-Inspector Madhukar Gite (PW-14).  The I.O. was
informed that Pushpabai had caught fire on account of the border, i.e., pallu  of her saree falling
on the stove where she was preparing snacks.   On receiving the above information, the I.O.
2 for short ‘ IO’
Page 2 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
made an entry in the Station diary and proceeded to the hospital, where he recorded the
statement of Pushpabai at 3.20 p.m. in the presence of two panchas (Ex.47).   This was the
first  dying  declaration  of  the  deceased.   In  a  gap  of  about  one  hour,  the  statement  of
Pushpabai was recorded by the Special Executive Magistrate3 (PW-9) between 4.30 and 5.00
PM (Ex.38).  This was the second dying declaration.  
4. Vide order dated 3rd February, 1997, charges were framed by the trial court against the
appellant under Section 302 IPC.  As the appellant pleaded not guilty, the matter was taken to
trial.  On its part, the prosecution examined 15 witnesses, including  Ramkrishna Mahadeo
Uchale (PW-2), father of the deceased; Raju Larokar;, SEM (PW-9); Samir Vijay Choudhary
Junior Resident Doctor (PW-10); Dr. Naresh Chandra Sethia Medical Officer; (PW-11); Balaji
Mohod  (PW-12),  the  Mediator who  had  arranged  the  marriage  of  the  parties;  Prabhakar
Bhaurao Patil PSI (PW-13); SI Madhukar Gite (PW-14), who was the I.O.; and  Rushi Shionkar
API (PW-15).   Out of fifteen witnesses, seven witnesses had turned hostile.   Vide judgment
dated 29th April, 1997, the appellant was convicted by the trial Court for having murdered his
wife by pouring kerosene on her and setting her on fire.   He was handed down a sentence of
life imprisonment with fine.  For holding the appellant guilty of the offence, the trial court relied
on the two dying declarations of the deceased recorded in writing by PW-9 and PW-14 and the
evidence of       PW-2 and PW-12, who deposed that the deceased had stated to them how the
incident had taken place.
3 for short ‘SEM’
Page 3 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
5. Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment, the appellant preferred an appeal before the High
Court.  Though the plea of the appellant who raised a question mark on the veracity of the two
written dying declarations was upheld by the High Court, giving credence to the testimony of
PW-2 and PW-12 coupled with the Chemical Analyser Report relating to the clothes of the
deceased and the appellant that detected kerosene on them, the judgment of the trial Court
was upheld and the appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed.  The said order has been
challenged by the appellant in the present appeal.
6. Mr. Rohan Thanwani, learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the impugned
judgment on the ground that although the High Court has discarded the two written dying
declarations of the deceased, one recorded by the I.O. (Ex.-47) and the other recorded by the
SEM  (Ex.-38),  it  has  still  proceeded  to  uphold  the  judgment  of  the  Session  Court  by
erroneously placing reliance on the oral dying declarations stated to have been made by the
deceased to her father, Ramkrishna Mahadeo Uchale (PW-2) and to the Mediator, Balaji
Mohod (PW-12).  Learned counsel contended that there were glaring material contradictions
between the statements made by the deceased before PW-9 and PW-14 as against the
statements of PW-2 and PW-12 inasmuch as before PW-9, the deceased had claimed that the
illicit relationship between the appellant and Kusum Gaikwad (PW-8) was the root cause of the
quarrel between the couple, whereas the version of PW-2 and PW-12 was that the entire
incident was attributable to the dowry demands made by the appellant on the deceased.  It
was further contended that the version of the deceased as recorded in the first and the second
Page 4 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
written dying declarations was entirely different from what was narrated by PW-2 and PW-12
before the Court. In fact, neither PW-2 nor PW-12 had made any statement to the police under
Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18984 and both the said witnesses had for the
first time made statements only when they entered the witness box during the trial.  
7. It was canvassed by learned counsel for the appellant that once the High Court had
rejected the written dying declarations of the deceased on the ground that there were several
conspicuous loopholes in recording of the said statements, there was no good reason for the
High Court to have relied on the oral statements allegedly made by the deceased to PW-2 and
PW-12, which were equally unreliable and therefore, ought to have met the same fate as the
written dying declarations of the deceased.  To buttress his submission that where there are
multiple dying declarations and each one is inconsistent with the other, then all the said dying
declarations ought to be discarded without any hesitation, learned counsel has cited Nallapati
Sivaiah v. Sub-Divisional Officer, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh  5.  The unreliability of an oral
dying declaration made to a family member in the absence of the doctor was sought to be
questioned by citing Arvind Singh v. State of Bihar  6, Arun Bhandudas Pawar v. State of
Maharashtra  7, and Poonam Bai v. State of Chhattisgarh  8.   
8. On the other hand, Mr. Sachin Patil, learned counsel appearing for the respondent -
State of Maharashtra has with his usual vehemence, disputed the arguments advanced by the
4 for short ‘ Cr.PC’
5 (2007) 15 SCC 465
6 (2001) 6 SCC 407
7 (2008) 11 SCC 232
8 (2019) 6 SCC 145
Page 5 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
other side and stated that both the written dying declarations, the first one recorded by the I.O.
at 3.20 PM and the second one recorded by the SEM (PW-9) at 4.30 PM, on the very same
day, were consistent and the deceased had clearly stated that it was the appellant who had set
her on fire.  He also alluded to the two fitness certificates issued by the attending doctor (PW-
10) in respect of the deceased before her statements were recorded and contended that the
said certificates showed that she was in a sound state of mind and competent to depose.
Similarly, the oral dying declarations subsequently made by the deceased in the presence of
her father (PW-2) and the mediator (PW-12) were also stated to be consistent with the version
of the victim and worthy of credence.  The narration as to the manner in which the deceased
was set on fire was stated to be consistent and it was contended that the cross-examination of
the said prosecution witnesses did not elicit anything favourable to the appellant on the above
aspect. Learned State counsel referred to the Chemical Analyser Report in respect of the
clothes of the deceased and the appellant that were seized from the spot to urge that it lent
credence to the version of the prosecution that the appellant had poured kerosene on the
deceased and had set her on fire. 
9. In support of his submission that where there are conflicting dying declarations, the
Court can accept one and discard the other as long as it is satisfied that the basic statement of
the deceased had remained consistent, learned State counsel cited State of Uttar Pradesh v.
Veerpal  and  Another  9,  Rizan  and  Another  v.  State  of  Chhattisgarh  10 and  Bhagwan
9 (2022) 4 SCC 741
10 (2003) 2 SCC 661
Page 6 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
Tukaram Dange v. State of Maharashtra  11.   The decision in Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State
of Maharashtra  12 was cited to state that the onus remains on the accused to explain how the
death had taken place within the privacy of the home, away from public gaze.
10. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the arguments advanced by learned
counsel for the parties and carefully perused the record.  The entire issue in the present case
hinges on  the  admissibility and  evidentiary  value  of  the  dying  declarations made  by the
deceased, two of which were in writing and recorded by PW-9 and PW-14 and the other two
were oral and communicated by the deceased to PW-2 and PW-12. 
11. Dying declaration is the last statement that is made by a person as to the cause of his
imminent death or the circumstances that had resulted in that situation, at a stage when the
declarant is conscious of the fact that there are virtually nil chances of his survival.  On an
assumption that at such a critical stage, a person would be expected to speak the truth, courts
have attached great value to the veracity of such a statement.  Section 32 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 187213 states that when a statement is made by a person as to the cause of
death, or as to any of the circumstances which resulted in his death, in cases in which the
cause of that person’s death comes into question, such a statement, oral or in writing made by
the deceased victim to the witness, is a relevant fact and is admissible in evidence. It is
noteworthy that the said provision is an exception to the general rule contained in Section 60 of
11  (2014) 4 SCC 270
12 (2006) 10 SCC 681
13 for short ‘Evidence Act’
Page 7 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
the Evidence Act that ‘hearsay evidence is inadmissible’ and only when such an evidence is
direct and is validated through cross-examination, is it considered to be trustworthy.  
12. In  Kundula Bala Subrahmanyam and Another v. State of Andhra Pradesh  14, this
Court had highlighted the significance of a dying declaration in the following words :
“18.  Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act is an exception to the general rule that
hearsay evidence is not admissible evidence and unless evidence is tested by
cross-examination, it is not creditworthy. Under Section 32, when a statement is
made by a person, as to the cause of death or as to any of the circumstances
which result in his death, in cases in which the cause of that person's death
comes into question, such a statement, oral or in writing, made by the deceased
to the witness is a relevant fact and is admissible in evidence. The statement
made by the deceased, called the dying declaration, falls in that category provided
it  has  been  made  by  the  deceased  while  in  a  fit  mental  condition.  A dying
declaration made by person on the verge of his death has a special sanctity as at
that solemn moment, a person is most unlikely to make any untrue statement. The
shadow of impending death is by itself the guarantee of the truth of the statement
made by the deceased regarding the causes or circumstances leading to his
death. A dying declaration, therefore, enjoys almost a sacrosanct status, as a
piece of evidence, coming as it does from the mouth of the deceased victim. Once
the statement of the dying person and the evidence of the witnesses testifying to
the same passes the test of careful scrutiny of the courts, it becomes a very
important and a reliable piece of evidence and if the court is satisfied that the
dying  declaration  is  true  and  free  from  any  embellishment  such  a  dying
declaration,  by  itself,  can  be  sufficient  for  recording  conviction  even  without
looking for any corroboration…….”
13. In Shudhakar v. State of Madhya Pradesh  15, this Court had opined that once a dying
declaration is found to be reliable, it can form the basis of conviction and made the following
observations : 
14 (1993) 2 SCC 684
15 (2012) 7 SCC 569 
Page 8 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
“20.   The “dying declaration” is the last statement made by a person at a stage
when he is in serious apprehension of his death and expects no chances of his
survival. At such time, it is expected that a person will speak the truth and only
the  truth. Normally in such  situations the  courts attach the  intrinsic value  of
truthfulness to such statement. Once such statement has been made voluntarily,
it is reliable and is not an attempt by the deceased to cover up the truth or falsely
implicate a person, then the courts can safely rely on such dying declaration and
it can form the basis of conviction. More so, where the version given by the
deceased  as  dying  declaration  is  supported  and  corroborated  by  other
prosecution evidence, there is no reason for the courts to doubt the truthfulness
of such dying declaration.”
14. In Paniben (Smt.) v. State of Gujarat  16, on examining the entire conspectus of the law
on the principles governing dying declaration, this Court had concluded thus :
“18.  …….. (i) There is neither rule of law nor of prudence that dying declaration
cannot be acted upon without corroboration. ( Munnu Raja  v. State of M.P .17 ) 
(ii) If the Court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and voluntary it can
base  conviction  on  it,  without  corroboration.  ( State  of  U.P .  v.  Ram  Sagar
Yadav18 ; Ramawati Devi  v. State of Bihar19 ).
(iii) This Court has to scrutinise the dying declaration carefully and must ensure
that the declaration is not the result of tutoring, prompting or imagination. The
deceased had opportunity to observe and identify the assailants and was in a fit
state to make the declaration. ( K. Ramachandra Reddy v.  Public Prosecutor20) .
(iv) Where dying declaration is suspicious it should not be acted upon without
corroborative evidence. ( Rasheed Beg  v. State of M.P .21) 
(v) Where the deceased was unconscious and could never make any dying
declaration the evidence with regard to it is to be rejected. ( Kake Singh   v. State
of M. P .22) 
(vi) A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity cannot form the basis of
conviction. ( Ram Manorath  v. State of U.P .23) 
16 (1992) 2 SCC 474 
17 (1976) 3 SCC 104 
18 (1985) 1 SCC 552
19 (1983) 1 SCC 211
20 (1976) 3 SCC 618
21 (1974) 4 SCC 264
22 1981 Suppl. SCC 25
23 (1981) 2 SCC 654
Page 9 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
(vii) Merely because a dying declaration does not contain the details as to the
occurrence,  it  is  not  to  be  rejected.  ( State  of  Maharashtra  v.  Krishnamurti
Laxmipati Naidu24) 
(viii) Equally, merely because it is a brief statement, it is not be discarded. On the
contrary,  the  shortness  of  the  statement  itself  guarantees  truth.  (Surajdeo
Oza  v. State of Bihar25). 
(ix) Normally the court in order to satisfy whether deceased was in a fit mental
condition to make the dying declaration look up to the medical opinion. But where
the eye witness has said that the deceased was in a fit and conscious state to
make this dying declaration, the medical opinion cannot prevail. ( Nanahau Ram
v. State of M.P .26).  
(x) Where the prosecution version differs from the version as given in the dying
declaration, the said declaration cannot be acted upon. ( State of U.P .  v. Madan
Mohan27). 
15. In cases involving multiple dying declarations made by the deceased, the question that
arises for consideration is as to which of the said dying declarations ought to be believed by
the Court and what would be the guiding factors for arriving at a just and lawful conclusion.
The problem becomes all the more knotty when the dying declarations made by the deceased
are found to be contradictory.  Faced with such a situation, the Court would be expected to
carefully scrutinize the evidence to find out as to which of the dying declarations can be
corroborated by other material evidence produced by the prosecution. Of equal significance is
the condition of the deceased at the relevant point in time, the medical evidence brought on
record that would indicate the physical and mental fitness of the deceased, the scope of the
close  relatives/family members having  influenced/ tutored  the  deceased  and  all  the  other
attendant circumstances that would help the Court in exercise of its discretion.  
24 1980 Suppl. SCC 455
25 1980 Suppl. SCC 769
26 1988 Suppl. SCC 152
27 (1989) 3 SCC 390
Page 10 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
16. In Lakhan v. State of Madhya Pradesh  28, where the deceased was burnt by pouring
kerosene oil on her and was brought to the hospital by the accused and his family members,
the Court noticed that she had made two varying dying declarations and held thus : 
“9. The  doctrine  of  dying  declaration  is  enshrined  in  the  legal  maxim  nemo
moriturus praesumitur mentire , which means “a man will not meet his Maker with
a lie in his mouth”. The doctrine of dying declaration is enshrined in Section 32 of
the Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter called as “the Evidence Act”) as an exception
to the general rule contained in Section 60 of the Evidence Act, which provides
that oral evidence in all cases must be direct i.e. it must be the evidence of a
witness, who says he saw it. The dying declaration is, in fact, the statement of a
person,  who  cannot  be  called  as  witness  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  cross-
examined. Such statements themselves are relevant facts in certain cases.
10. This Court has considered time and again the relevance/probative value of
dying declarations recorded under different situations and also in cases where
more than one dying declaration has been recorded. The law is that if the court is
satisfied that the dying declaration is true and made voluntarily by the deceased,
conviction can be based solely on it, without any further corroboration. It is neither
a rule of law nor of prudence that a dying declaration cannot be relied upon
without corroboration. When a dying declaration is suspicious, it should not be
relied upon without having corroborative evidence. The court has to scrutinise the
dying declaration carefully and must ensure that the declaration is not the result
of tutoring, prompting or imagination. The deceased must be in a fit state of mind
to make the declaration and must identify the assailants. Merely because a dying
declaration does not contain the details of the occurrence, it cannot be rejected
and in case there is merely a brief statement, it is more reliable for the reason
that the shortness of the statement is itself a guarantee of its veracity. If the dying
declaration  suffers  from  some  infirmity,  it  cannot  alone  form  the  basis  of
conviction. Where the prosecution version differs from the version given in the
dying  declaration,  the  said  declaration  cannot  be  acted  upon.  (Vide  Khushal
Rao  v. State  of  Bombay29 , Rasheed  Beg  v. State  of  M.P .30 , K.  Ramachandra
Reddy  v. Public  Prosecutor31,  State  of  Maharashtra  v. Krishnamurti  Laxmipati
Naidu32, Uka Ram  v. State of Rajasthan33, Babulal  v. State of M.P .34 , Muthu Kutty
v. State.35, State of Rajasthan  v. Wakteng36  and  Sharda  v. State of Rajasthan37”.
28 (2010) 8 SCC 514
29 AIR 1958 SC 22
30 (1974) 4 SCC 264
31 (1976) 3 SCC 618
32 1980 Supp SCC 455
33 (2001) 5 SCC 254
34 (2003) 12 SCC 490
35  (2005) 9 SCC 113
36 (2007) 14 SCC 550
37 (2010) 2 SCC 85
Page 11 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
17. In Amol Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh  38, when faced with two dying declarations
containing inconsistencies, the approach to be adopted by the Court was summarized as
under:
“13.  Law relating to appreciation of evidence in the form of more than one dying
declaration  is  well  settled.  Accordingly,  it  is  not  the  plurality  of  the  dying
declarations but the reliability thereof that adds weight to the prosecution case. If
a dying declaration is found to be voluntary, reliable and made in fit mental
condition, it can be relied upon without any corroboration. The statement should
be consistent throughout. If the deceased had several opportunities of making
such  dying  declarations,  that  is  to  say,  if  there  are  more  than  one  dying
declaration  they  should  be  consistent.  (See  Kundula  Bala
Subrahmanyam  v. State of A.P .39) However, if some inconsistencies are noticed
between one dying declaration and the other, the court has to examine the nature
of  the  inconsistencies,  namely,  whether  they  are  material  or  not.  While
scrutinising the contents of various dying declarations, in such a situation, the
court has to examine the same in the light of the various surrounding facts and
circumstances.”
18. In Sher Singh and Another v. State of Punjab  40, this Court has held thus :
“16.  Acceptability of a dying declaration is greater because the declaration is
made in extremity. When the party is at the verge of death, one rarely finds any
motive to tell falsehood and it is for this reason that the requirements of oath and
cross-examination are dispensed with in case of a dying declaration. Since the
accused has no power of cross-examination, the court would insist that the dying
declaration should be of such a nature as to inspire full confidence of the court in
its truthfulness and correctness. The court should ensure that the statement was
not as a result of tutoring or prompting or a product of imagination. It is for the
court to ascertain from the evidence placed on record that the deceased was in a
fit state of mind and had ample opportunity to observe and identify the culprit.
Normally, the court places reliance on the medical evidence for reaching the
conclusion whether the person making a dying declaration was in a fit state of
mind, but where the person recording the statement states that the deceased was
in a fit and conscious state, the medical opinion will not prevail, nor can it be said
that since there is no certification of the doctor as to the fitness of mind of the
declarant, the dying declaration is not acceptable. What is essential is that the
person recording the dying declaration must be satisfied that the deceased was in
a fit state of mind. Where it is proved by the testimony of the Magistrate that the
declarant was fit to make the statement without there being the doctor's opinion
to that effect, it can be acted upon provided the court ultimately holds the same to
38 (2008) 5 SCC 468
39 (1993) 2 SCC 684
40 (2008) 4 SCC 265
Page 12 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
be voluntary and truthful. A certificate by the doctor is essentially a rule of caution
and, therefore, the voluntary and truthful nature of a statement can be established
otherwise.”
 
19. It is thus clear that in cases where the Court finds that there exist more than one dying
declarations, each one of them must be examined with care and caution and only after
satisfying itself as to which of the dying declarations appears to be free from suspicious
circumstances and has been made voluntarily, should it be accepted.  As observed in the
judgments quoted above, it is not necessary that in every case, a dying declaration ought to
be corroborated with material evidence, ocular or otherwise.  It is more a rule of prudence that
courts seek validation of the dying declaration from attending facts and circumstances and
other evidence brought on record.   For the very same reason, a certificate by the doctor that
the declarant was fit to make a statement, is treated as a rule of caution to establish the
truthfulness of the statement made by the deceased.  
20. In Kundula Bala Subrahmanyam  (supra), this Court had observed that if there are
more than one dying declarations, then the Court must scrutinize each one of them to find out
whether the different dying declarations are consistent with each other in material particulars
before accepting and relying on the same.  At the end of the day, each case must be decided
on its own peculiar facts.  There can be no hard and fast rule on evaluation of the evidence
brought before the Court, including the surrounding circumstances at the time when the
deceased  had  made  the  dying  declaration.  The  focus  of  the  Court  is  of  ensuring  the
voluntariness of the process, of being satisfied that there was no tutoring or prompting, of
Page 13 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
being  convinced  that  the  deceased  was  in a  fit  state  of  mind  before  making  the  dying
declaration, of ascertaining that ample opportunity was available to the declarant to identify
the accused. 
21. In Veerpal (supra), this Court has clarified that a dying declaration can be acted upon
without any other corroboration and observed as below :   
“16.  Now, on the aspect, whether in the absence of any corroborative evidence,
there can be a conviction relying upon the dying declaration only is concerned,
the  decision  of  this  Court  in  Munnu  Raja41,  and  the  subsequent  decision
in Paniben  v. State of Gujarat42, are required to be referred to. In the aforesaid
decisions, it is specifically observed and held that there is neither a rule of law nor
of prudence to the effect that a dying declaration cannot be acted upon without a
corroboration. It is observed and held that if the Court is satisfied that the dying
declaration  is  true  and  voluntary  it  can  base  its  conviction  on  it,  without
corroboration.  Similar  view  has  also  been  expressed  in  State  of  U.P .  v. Ram
Sagar Yadav43 and  Ramawati Devi  v. State of Bihar44. Therefore, there can be a
conviction solely based upon the dying declaration without corroboration.”
22. However, if a dying declaration suffers from some infirmity, it cannot be the sole basis
for convicting the accused.  In those circumstances, the court must step back and consider
whether  the  cumulative  factors  in  a  case  make  it  difficult  to  rely  upon  the  said  dying
declaration.  In this context, it would be profitable to refer to  Nallapati Sivaiah  (supra),
wherein this Court held as under :
“46.  It is the duty of the prosecution to establish the charge against the accused
beyond reasonable doubt. The benefit of doubt must always go in favour of the
accused. It is true that dying declaration is a substantive piece of evidence to be
relied on provided it is proved that the same was voluntary and truthful and the
victim was in a fit state of mind. The evidence of the Professor of Forensic
Medicine casts considerable doubt as regards the condition of the deceased to
41 (1976) 3 SCC 104
42 (1992) 2 SCC 474
43 (1985) 1 SCC 552
44 (1983) 1 SCC 211
Page 14 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
make a voluntary and truthful statement. It is for that reason non-examination of
Dr. T. Narasimharao, Casualty Medical Officer, who was said to have been
present at the time of recording of both the dying declarations attains some
significance. It is not because it is the requirement in law that the doctor who
certified about the condition of the victim to make a dying declaration is required
to be examined in every case. But it was the obligation of the prosecution to
lead corroborative evidence available in the peculiar circumstances of the case.
xxxx xxxx xxxx
52. The dying declaration must inspire confidence so as to make it safe to act
upon. Whether it is safe to act upon a dying declaration depends upon not only
the  testimony  of  the  person  recording  the  dying  declaration—be  it  even  a
Magistrate but also all the material available on record and the circumstances
including the medical evidence. The evidence and the material available on
record must be properly weighed in each case to arrive at a proper conclusion.
The court must satisfy itself that the person making the dying declaration was
conscious and fit to make statement for which purposes not only the evidence
of persons recording the dying declaration but also cumulative effect of the
other evidence including the medical evidence and the circumstances must be
taken into consideration.”
23. In  Arvind Singh  (supra), this Court has held that dying declaration should be dealt
with care and caution and corroboration thereof, though not essential, is expedient in order to
strengthen the evidentiary value of the declaration.  Even where independent witnesses may
not be available, all the precautions should be taken when it comes to acceptance of such a
statement as trustworthy evidence.  In other words, even though direct evidence may not be
available, circumstantial evident without a break in the chain of events, would add weight to
the evidentiary value of the dying declaration. 
24. The principles governing the circumstances where the courts can  accept a  dying
declaration without corroboration, have been dealt with extensively in  Khushal Rao (supra)
and for ready reference, reproduced as under :
“16.   On a review of the relevant provisions of the Evidence Act and of the
decided cases in the different High Courts in India and in this Court, we have
Page 15 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
come to the conclusion, in agreement with the opinion of the Full Bench of the
Madras High Court, aforesaid, (1) that it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule
of law that a dying declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is
corroborated; (2) that each case must be determined on its own facts keeping in
view the circumstances in which the dying declaration was made; (3) that it
cannot be laid down as a general proposition that a dying declaration is a weaker
kind of evidence than other pieces of evidence; (4) that a dying declaration
stands on the same footing as another piece of evidence and has to be judged in
the  light  of  surrounding  circumstances  and  with  reference  to  the  principles
governing the weighing of evidence; (5) that a dying declaration which has been
recorded by a competent Magistrate in the proper manner, that is to say, in the
form of questions and answers, and, as far as practicable, in the words of the
maker  of  the  declaration,  stands  on  a  much  higher  footing  than  a  dying
declaration which depends upon oral testimony which may suffer from all the
infirmities of human memory and human character, and (6) that in order to test
the  reliability  of  a  dying  declaration,  the  Court  has  to  keep  in  view,  the
circumstances like the opportunity of the dying man for observation, for example,
whether there was sufficient light if the crime was committed at night; whether the
capacity of the man to remember the facts stated, had not been impaired at the
time he was making the statement, by circumstances beyond his control; that the
statement  has been  consistent  throughout  if  he had  several  opportunities  of
making  a  dying  declaration  apart  from  the  official  record  of  it;  and  that  the
statement had been made at the earliest opportunity and was not the result of
tutoring by interested parties.”
25. The credibility of a dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate has also come up for
consideration in several cases and it has been held that a Magistrate being an uninterested
witness and a respected officer and there being no circumstances or material to suspect that
he  would  have  any animus against  the accused  or would in  any way be interested for
fabricating a dying declaration, such a declaration recorded by the Magistrate, ought not be
doubted.   Absence of corroborative evidence for convicting an accused based on a dying
declaration has been a matter of discussion in several cases [Ref.:  Munnu Raja  (supra),
Paniben (Smt.)  (supra),  Ram Sagar Yadav  (supra),  Ramawati Devi  (supra) and  Veerpal
(supra)].
Page 16 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
26. Coming back to the case at hand, there is no dispute about the fact that the deceased
did receive severe burn injuries on 27th March, 1995 at her house.  Dr. Nareshchandra Sethia
(PW-11), who had conducted the postmortem, stated that she had received burn injuries on
both arms and legs, chest, abdomen, back, head, neck and face to the extent of 93%.  He also
deposed that the probable cause of her death was due to the said burn injuries.
27. For convicting the appellant, the trial Court had primarily relied upon the two written
dying declarations of the deceased, one recorded by the SEM (PW-9) and the other by the IO
(PW-14) and the oral dying declarations stated to have  been made by the deceased to her
father (PW-2) and Balaji (PW-12), the Mediator who had settled the marriage of the parties.
However, noting the several loopholes in the procedure adopted while recording the dying
declarations by the SEM (PW-9) and the IO (PW-14), the High Court found it unsafe to rely on
them and kept them aside.  The reasons are not far to see.
28. Coming to the first dying declaration recorded by the IO, Sub-Inspector Madhukar Gite
(PW-14), the High Court found it difficult to rely on the same for the following reasons:
(a) the requisition letter that PW-14 had stated he had received at the police station
mentioning inter alia  that the deceased had caught fire due to the border of her
saree (Pallu) falling on the burning stove at the time of preparing snacks on the
stove at her house at about 12.30 p.m., on the fateful day, did not mention the
name of the hospital where the deceased was admitted.  Pertinently, it was on
Page 17 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
the basis of the said requisition letter that PW-14 had proceeded to the Hospital
to meet the deceased and record her statement;
(b) there was an ambiguity regarding the source from which PW-14 had received
the aforesaid information and no effort was made to clarify the said ambiguity
during the course of trial;
(c) PW-14 did not obtain any certificate from the attending doctor so as to establish
the  physical  and  mental  condition  of  the  deceased  before  recording  her
statement;
(d) the doctor was not even present when the statement of the deceased was
recorded;
(e) the dying declaration was not recorded by PW-14 in seclusion.  Due to the
presence of the relatives of the deceased at the time of recording her statement,
the probability of the deceased being prompted/tutored could not be ruled out.
29. Following  were  the  reasons  that  collectively  weighed  with  the  High  Court  for
disregarding the second written dying declaration recorded by the SEM (PW-9):
(a) the attending doctor did not examine the deceased in the presence of PW-9
before her statement was recorded;
Page 18 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
(b) the  statement  of  the  deceased  was  recorded  by PW-9 in  the  absence  of  
the doctor;
(c) the  doctor  did  not  make  any  endorsement  on  the  requisition  letter  in  the  
presence of PW-9;
(d) PW-9 did not record the statement of the deceased himself.  Instead, he delegated
the task to the police constable who reduced the statement of the deceased into
writing;
(e) after  reducing  the  statement  into  writing,  the  same  was  not  read  over  to  the
deceased before her signatures were obtained;
(f) the statement of the deceased was not recorded in a question-answer format.
30. The above infirmities were considered more than adequate for the High Court to have
wholly discarded the two written dying declarations of the deceased.
31. Since there is no challenge laid to the findings returned by the High Court for discarding
the two written dying declarations finding them riddled with deficiencies, thus making them
unreliable, we do not propose to delve into their credit worthiness. Suffice it is to say that there
was  every  reason  for  the  High  Court  to  have  found  them  untrustworthy.  Instead,  it  is
considered appropriate to examine the worth of the oral dying declarations stated to have been
made by the deceased in the presence of PW-2 and PW-12.
Page 19 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
32. Ramkrishna Mahadeo Uchale (PW-2),  father of the deceased  deposed that he had
received a message regarding his daughter getting burnt and had rushed to  Mayo Hospital
where she was admitted.  He noticed that the deceased had sustained burn injuries and was in
a serious condition.  He enquired from her as to how did the incident take place to which she
stated that when she was cleaning wheat grain, on the fateful day, the appellant had come to
the house, beaten her, poured kerosene oil on her body and had set her on fire, while tying her
hands.  PW-2 deposed that after her marriage to the appellant in the year 1994, his daughter
used to complain that the appellant used to illtreat her on account of demanding money and
used to suspect her character.  He stated that he had lodged a report with the Pardi Village
Police Station regarding the same.  During his cross-examination, PW-2 had denied that his
statement was recorded by the police during the investigation.  Although the Assistant Public
Prosecutor was permitted to re-examine PW-2 on the above aspect, but nothing material
emerged from the said re-examination except that he stated that an inquiry was made by
Lakadganj police relating to the burning of his daughter.  Significantly, during the extensive
cross-examination of the I.O. Sub-Inspector Madhukar Gite (PW-14), he had categorically
stated that he had recorded the statement of PW-2, but during his cross-examination, PW-14
was not confronted with any of the claims made by PW-2 pertaining to the appellant having
assaulted the deceased for money or of suspecting her character, etc.  In fact, at his turn, PW-
14 had denied the fact that he had not recorded the statement of PW-2.
Page 20 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
33. The second oral dying declaration was made by the deceased to Balaji (PW-12), t he
Mediator who was instrumental in solemnizing the marriage of the appellant and the deceased.
Though he deposed that the appellant had made several demands on the deceased after the
marriage, including cash and a gold chain and that he used to threaten her that if she did not
bring money from her parents, he would beat her, during his cross-examination, he admitted
that he did not state so before the police.  PW-12 further stated that he along with PW-2 had
gone to visit the deceased at her house in the absence of the appellant and at that time, she
had complained that the appellant used to beat her and requested that she be taken back to
her parental home.  Thereafter, PW-12 and PW-2 had lodged a report against the appellant at
the Lakadganj Police Station.  He further stated that the deceased was brought back to her
parent’s home for fifteen days.  After she had returned to her matrimonial house, fifteen days
down the line, PW-12 claimed to have received a chit stating that the deceased had caught fire
and was admitted in Mayo Hospital.  When he visited the hospital, the deceased told him that
when she was cleaning wheat, the appellant had come home, tied her hands with a ribbon and
had taken her inside.   Thereafter, the appellant had poured kerosene on the body of the
deceased and lighted a match stick setting her on fire.
34. A perusal of the testimonies of PW-2 and PW-12 show that they have offered varying
versions of what had allegedly been narrated to them by the deceased.  Both of them stated
that failure to satisfy the appellant’s constant dowry demands had led to the incident.  There
was no mention of the illicit relationship of the appellant with a widow in the neighbourhood
Page 21 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
which was a constant cause of quarrel between the deceased and her husband and had led to
the  incident.   Pertinently,  both  the  said  witnesses  stated  that  their  statements  were  not
recorded by the police during the investigation and that they had deposed for the first time only
when they had entered the witness box during the trial.
35. In  Arun Bhanudas Pawar  (supra), cited by learned counsel for the appellant, this
Court had declined to accept the testimony of an interested witness who happened to be the
mother  of  the  victim,  in  the  absence  of  any  corroboration  from  an  independent  witness
including the Medical Officer who was attending to the victim, to prove that the victim had
regained consciousness when the mother had met him in the hospital and had named the
accused as the assailant along with two other associates.  An additional factor that weighed
with the court for rejecting the testimony of the mother was that she had not stated so in her
statement recorded by the Police under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and it was for the first time before
the Court that she had made such a statement.  Holding that the oral dying declaration made
by the deceased ought to be treated with care and caution, since the maker of the statement
cannot be subjected to any cross-examination, the Court found fault with the High Court and
trial Court for having accepted the said oral dying declaration allegedly made by the deceased
to her mother, an interested witness, when there was nothing to show that the deceased was
in a fit condition to make an oral declaration to his mother.  In Poonam Bai  (supra), a similar
view was taken by this Court and it was held thus:
Page 22 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
“16.  As far as the oral dying declaration is concerned, the evidence on record is
very shaky, apart from the fact that evidence relating to oral dying declaration is a
weak type of evidence in and of itself.  As per the case of the prosecution, the
deceased had made an oral dying declaration before Lalita Sahu (PW 2), Pilaram
Sahu (PW 3), Parvati Bai (PW 4), and others.  Though PWs 2, 3 and 4 have
deposed that the deceased did  make an oral dying declaration before them
implicating the appellant, this version is clearly only an afterthought, inasmuch as
the  same  was  brought  up  before  the  trial  court  for  the  first  time.   In  their
statements recorded by the police under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, these witnesses had not made any statement relating to the alleged
oral dying declaration of the deceased.  These factors have been noted by the
trial court in its detailed judgment.  Thus, the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 4 relating
to the oral dying declaration is clearly an improved version, and this has been
proved by the defence in accordance with law.”
36. We are of the opinion that once the High Court had disagreed with the Session Court
and discarded the two written dying declarations of the deceased due to several glaring
lacunae in the procedure adopted by the SEM (PW-9) and the I.O. (PW-14) in recording the
said statement, then the appellant could not have been indicted on the oral testimony of PW-2,
father of the deceased and PW-12, family friend, both of who were interested witnesses and
whose evidence runs contrary to the versions of the deceased recorded by PW-9 and PW-14.
It must be remembered that all the four dying declarations, two in writing and the other two
oral, were based on the statements given by the deceased at different times on the very same
day, i.e., 27th March, 1995, when she had suffered 93% burn injuries and there are serious
doubt about her being mentally and physically fit to give her statement.  The IO (PW-14) had
recorded the first dying declaration at 3.20 p.m. this was followed by the SEM (PW-9) having
recorded the second dying declaration between 4.30p.m. and 5.00 p.m.  It was on the very
same day that PW-2 and PW-12 had also met the deceased at the hospital and claimed that
Page 23 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
she had informed them as to how she had received the burn injuries and named the appellant
as the culprit.  
37. Both, PW-2 and PW-12 have deposed that in her oral dying declaration, the deceased
had referred to the dowry demands made on her by the appellant and the fact that he had
suspected her character, which led to the alleged incident.  As noted above, nowhere in their
testimonies is there any reference made to the prosecution version that the appellant was
having an illicit relation with a widow residing in the neighbourhood, which was the main cause
of acrimony between the couple and had resulted in the incident.  The diametrically different
version of the reasons that led to the alleged incident casts a shadow on the entire testimony
of PW-2 and PW-12, making it unsafe to rely on them and indict the appellant for the charge
framed  against  him.   We  are  therefore  of  the  opinion  that the prosecution has failed  to
discharge the obligation cast on it of leading trustworthy corroborative evidence to back-up the
testimonies of PW-2 and PW-12.  
38. In  the  light  of  the  evidence  discussed  above  and  being  mindful  of  the  principles
governing appreciation of the evidence related to multiple dying declarations, we find it difficult
to endorse the conclusion arrived at by the High Court.  The evidence of PW-2 and PW-12
cannot be treated as stellar enough to hold the appellant guilty for the offence of murdering his
wife.  Hence, he is entitled to being granted benefit of doubt. 
Page 24 of 25Criminal Appeal No.485 of 2012
39. As a result of the aforesaid discussion, the impugned judgment is quashed and set
aside.  Consequently, the appellant is acquitted of the charge framed against him and is
directed to be set at liberty forthwith, if not required in connection with any other case.  
................................. J.
   [B.R. GAVAI]
    ................................... J.
    [HIMA KOHLI]
NEW DELHI,
JUNE 02, 2022
Page 25 of 25           IN THE  SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION
      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.485/2012  
UTTAM                           ..     APPELLANT(S)
                     VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA        ..    RESPONDENT(S)
 O R D E R
For the reasons to be recorded separately,
the appeal is allowed.
The judgment and order of the Additional
Sessions Court, Nagpur dated 29.04.1997 and that
of the High Court dated 26.07.2010 are quashed and
set aside.
The  appellant  is  acquitted  of  all  the
charges  and  directed  to  be  set  at  liberty
forthwith, if not required in connection with any
other case.
                             ................ ....J.
                      [  B.R. GAVAI ]  
                
         
                         
                             .... ................J.
                                   [ HIMA KOHLI]
      
NEW DELHI,
JUNE 02, 2022.   
 