NON­REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 914  OF 2022
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO.1582 OF 2020)
HARPAL SINGH                                                   …APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE OF PUNJAB    …RESPONDENT
J U D G M E N T
J K Maheshwari, J.
Leave granted.
2.The instant appeal is preferred by the accused against final
judgment dated 17.10.2019 passed by High Court of Punjab and
Haryana at Chandigarh in CRA­D­257­DB­2003 (O&M), whereby
the Division Bench of High Court declined to interfere with the
judgment of the Sessions Court dated 04.02.2003 by which the
appellant was convicted for the charge under Section 302/120­B
1of   Indian   Penal   Code   (‘IPC’)   and   directed   to   undergo
imprisonment   for   life   and   pay   fine   of   Rs.1000/­,   in   default
further rigorous imprisonment for six months. The appellant was
also   convicted   under   Section   342/120­B   of   IPC   and   was
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for six months with an order
to run both the sentences concurrently.
3.The prosecution story in brief is that on 03.04.2000 while a
police party headed by inspector Atma Singh  (hereinafter referred
to   as   'the   Investigating   Officer/IO’)   of   Police   Station,   Kotwali
Amritsar   was   on   patrol   duty   at   Chowk   Katra   Jaimal   Singh,
received   information   regarding   murder   of   deceased   Banarasi
Dass. The police party went to the house of deceased, where
complainant Leela Wati, wife of deceased made the complaint and
her statement was also recorded by IO. It is stated that she was
residing with the deceased in a house at Katra Jaimal Singh,
Amritsar on first floor. The deceased used to work in the shop
with his son Vinod Kumar, which was in the name and style of
Sunder Shoes. On the intervening midnight of 2/3.04.2000 they
were sleeping in their house, when she woke up suddenly saw
that a Sikh youth wearing a white kurta payjama and patka of
the same colour on his head, aged about 35/36 years along with
2a clean shaved person, aged about 30/32 years have entered in
the house. Sikh youth was armed with a dagger/chhura, who
first strangulated her husband Banarasi Dass thereafter, gave
dagger blows above the stomach while lying on the bed. The Sikh
youth demanded keys of Godrej almirah from the complainant,
which out of fear she handed over. She was locked in a bathroom
by them. Both the intruders looted gold ornaments, cash and
other articles and went back. The chowkidar rang the call bell
but because she was confined in the bathroom so could not open
the door. In the morning, the chowkidar with the help of other
persons opened the door of house and also of bathroom, then,
she came out. On initial search, she found that the intruders had
taken away six gold bangles, Rs.7000/­ in cash and other articles
of gold including cash from the wooden almirah also. The IO after
making some endorsement below the statement of complainant
sent ruqa to the police station, on the basis of which, formal FIR
No.51 dated 03.04.2000, was registered of the offences under
Sections 460, 342, 120­B and 34 of IPC at Police Station Kotwali,
Amritsar. 
4.The IO carried out the inquest proceedings with regard to
unnatural   death   of   deceased   Banarasi   Dass.   He   drew   rough
3sketch to the place of occurrence and blood­stained bed sheet
was kept into sealed parcel. Dead body was sent for post mortem
examination.   After   such   examination,   Head   Constable   Nirmal
Singh produced the clothes of the deceased before the IO, which
was converted into a sealed parcel and taken into possession.
The   IO   recorded   the   statements   of   other   witnesses   also.   On
19.04.2000,   the   IO   went   to   the   shop   of   the   deceased   and
collected   license   to   run   the   shop   and   purchase   bills.   On
03.05.2000, accused Gulzar Singh, Bikramjit Singh and Ashwani
Kumar   were   arrested   in   this   case.   During   the   course   of
interrogation, they made disclosure statement to which recoveries
were effected. From accused Ashwani Kumar police recovered
three gold biscuits and a wrist watch, whereas, from accused
Bikramjit Singh police recovered five gold biscuits of 10 tolas, 20
gold biscuits of 5 tolas each, one gold necklace, two gold bangles,
two   ear   rings,   one   wrist   watch   and   cash   amount   of
Rs.2,36,000/­. From accused Gulzar Singh police recovered 10
gold biscuits weighing 10 tolas each, 10 gold biscuits weighing 5
tolas each, cash amount of Rs.1,20,000/­ along with a pair of ear
rings,   two   gold   bangles,   one   necklace   and   a   dagger.   All   the
4recovered   articles   were   identified   by   PW­12   Vinod   Kumar
Gambhir, son of the deceased. 
5. On 10.05.2000, accused Harpal Singh who is Appellant
herein   and   Pavitar   Singh   were   apprehended   while   they   were
coming in a car bearing No.PB­02H­3113. They were formally
arrested in this case and the car in question was seized. Both the
accused   were   interrogated   and   they   also   suffered   disclosure
statements,   in   pursuance   thereof,   from   Harpal   Singh   police
recovered 10 gold biscuits of 5 tolas each and 08 gold biscuits of
10 tolas, in addition to cash amount of Rs.2,84,000/­, whereas,
from   accused   Pavitar   Singh   police   recovered   2   gold   biscuits
weighing   10   tolas   each   and   a   ladies’   wrist   watch.  
These   articles   were   identified   by   prosecution   witness   PW­12,
Vinod Kumar Gambhir, son of deceased.
6. On   18.05.2000,   IO   went   to   the   hotel   Sita   Niwas   and
obtained copy of the entry register of the hotel Ext.PAA. It was
seized, vide  a  recovery  memo  Ext.PKK.  On  06.06.2000,  Head
Constable   Kapal   Dev   produced   two   photographs   along   with
negatives,   which   were   taken   into   possession.   Statements   of
witnesses were recorded. After completion of investigation and
5other formalities, the challan against the accused was filed in the
Court   of   Judicial   Magistrate   1st   Class   (for   short   'JMFC'),
Amritsar, who supplied copies of documents relied upon in the
challan to the accused free of costs as provided under Section
207 Cr.P.C and then find the offence under Section 460 was
exclusively   triable   by   the   Court   of   Session,   vide   her   detailed
committal order dated 22.08.2000, committed the case to the
Court   of   Session.   On   committal,   learned   Session   Judge,
Amritsar, after finding prima facie case framed the charges for
commission of offences under Sections 460, 302, 342 and 120­B
of IPC. The accused persons were abjured the guilt. During the
course of trial 15 prosecution witnesses were examined. 
7.Statements of the accused were recorded under Section
313   Cr.P.C.,   in   which   all   the   incriminating   circumstances
appearing   against   such   accused   were   put   to   them   but   they
denied the same, contending that they are innocent and have
been falsely implicated in the case. Accused Ashwani Kumar,
Bikramjit Singh and Gulzar Singh had filed written statements,
contending that the allegations against them were false. They
were kept in illegal detention and created false evidence against
them. 
68.Appellant Harpal Singh had filed separate written defence,
mentioning therein that he was having a mini bus No.PB­02­H­
9661   which   was   sold   on   05.11.1999   for   consideration   of
Rs.3,80,000/­ to Hakumat Singh, resident of Village Harpura,
Tehsil Batala, District Gurdaspur and delivered the custody of
vehicle to the  purchaser. The  accused further stated that  he
wanted to purchase a truck with the sale proceeds of the mini
bus   which   amount   was   lying   at   his   house.   During   the
investigation of the case, the police unlawfully recovered that
amount and out of which, recovery of a sum of Rs.2,84,000/­
was shown from the possession of Harpal Singh with a view to
create evidence against him as a matter of fact, no recovery had
been effected. 
9.Learned Sessions Judge, Amritsar, vide judgment dated
04.02.2003, convicted and sentenced all the accused persons
including   appellant   herein   for   the   charge   under   Section
302/120­B   IPC   and   directed   to   undergo   sentence   for
imprisonment of life and to pay a fine of Rs.1000/­ in default
further   rigorous   imprisonment   for   six   months.   All   the   five
accused   persons   filed   appeal   against   the   judgment   of   their
7conviction   and   sentence   before   High   Court   of   Punjab   and
Haryana.
10.In   the   impugned   order   passed   by   the   High   Court,   the
testimony of PW­1 Leela Wati has been relied upon to support the
case of prosecution and the commission of murder with robbery.
In her testimony, she has described the looted articles and also
supported the supplementary statement. The defence taken by
the defendant regarding planting of the gold articles by the son of
the deceased Vinod Kumar being gold smuggler was not found
worthy   to   rely   upon.   For   the   purpose   of   commission   of   the
offence, the testimony of PW­4 Vinod Singh Chauhan was found
worthy of credence, however, the commission of the offence with
the   aid   of   recoveries   and   also   by   identification   of   the   looted
articles. The High Court has also relied upon the extra­judicial
confession made by PW­14 Devinder Kumar. Thus, concluded
that the conviction of the appellant for the charges proved beyond
reasonable doubt and the finding of the Trial Court do not suffer
from   any   infirmity   warranting   interference.   Consequently,   the
appeal was dismissed by the impugned order.
811.Learned counsel for the appellant has strenuously urged
that the recovery of articles and cash from him has not been
proved   as   per   law.   The   recovered   articles   claimed   from   the
accused   were   not   the   same   articles   as   described   by   the
complainant. The appellant has taken several defence regarding
sale of mini bus       No. PB­02­H­9661 for the consideration of
Rs.3,80,000/­   to   Hakumat   Singh   and   the   police   has   illegally
recovered the said consideration amount for the sake of looted
article with intent to implicate him falsely. The defence to show
false recovery has  been supported by the testimony of DW­1
Dhanpal Singh and DW­2 Surinder Mohan Luthra. The evidence
regarding prior meeting of mind is not on record thereby the
appellant conspired or was a part of conspiracy in committing the
loot   and   murder   of   the   deceased.   The   connecting   evidence
regarding   recovery   of   the   record   of   the   hotel   has   not   been
produced   in   original.   Thus,   merely   on   the   basis   of   the   said
evidence and the recovery, which is not summarised in the FIR,
the conviction of the appellant is wholly unsustainable. 
12.On the other hand, the State counsel contends that the
amount recovered from the possession of the appellant as a sale
proceed of the mini bus has not been proved in support of his
9defence. The identification of the gold biscuits and looted articles
were made by PW­12 Vinod Kumar Gambhir son of the deceased.
In the defence, it has not been said that the gold articles seized
were of the accused persons. No explanation for huge recovery of
gold items has put forward from the accused, simultaneously
Hakumat Singh, to whom the mini bus was sold, has not been
examined, hence, the defence was not found plausible. On the
other hand, looking to the testimony of PW­1 Leela Wati, PW­2
Nasib Singh, PW­4 Vinod Singh Chauhan and also the extra­
judicial statement given by PW­14 Davinder Kumar, the High
Court has rightly confirmed the findings of the Trial Court. Thus,
the   findings   of   fact   concurrently   recorded   are   based   on   due
appreciation of evidence and those findings are not perverse. 
13.After having heard learned counsel for the parties and on
perusal of the record, it is seen that ample evidence to have
conspiracy between all five accused have been duly proved. The
involvement of the appellant is fully established by the testimony
of PW­4 Vinod Singh Chauhan, who was an employee on the
shop ‘Sunder Shoes House’. As per his testimony, it is clear that
co­accused Ashwani Kumar another employee in the shop, met
with   appellant/accused   Harpal   Singh   and   Pahlwan   Bikramjit
10Singh on the shop at about 4­5 p.m. on 15.03.2000. At that time
deceased Banarasi Dass was counting the cash currency at the
counter. Ashwani Kumar told Harpal Singh and Bikramjit Singh
that Banarasi Dass was having ample money with him and he
was also involved in the money lending business keeping the gold
as   security.   Subsequently,   on   the   date   of   incident   i.e.,
02.04.2000, appellant alongwith co­accused visited the shop and
made   inquiry   about   co­accused   Ashwani   Kumar   (another
employee of Sunder Shoes). Thus, by the evidence of this witness,
nexus between appellant Harpal Singh and co­accused persons is
fully established. The defence taken by the appellant regarding
recovery of the cash money of Rs.2,84,000/­ from him by virtue
of sale of mini bus has not been proved because the said mini
bus was not sold to him and the buyer of the said mini bus
Hakumat Singh has not been examined. DW­1 Dhanpal Singh in
his   cross­examination   has   categorically   admitted   that   the
amount was not lying in his bank account or of his father. Thus,
the   defence   of   the   appellant   was   not   found   plausible.
Simultaneously   no   plausible   defence   to   disprove   other   looted
articles have been brought on record.  
1114.We have perused the testimony of other witnesses that
includes PW­1 Leela Wati, PW­4 Vinod Singh Chauhan, PW­12
Vinod Kumar Gambhir and PW­14 Davinder Kumar on the basis
of the same the involvement of the appellant alongwith other co­
accused has been fully proved by prosecution beyond reasonable
doubt.   The   Trial   Court   and   the   High   Court   has   rightly
appreciated the evidence and proved the charges while convicting
the   appellant.   The   minor   inconsistencies   in   the   statement   of
witnesses   are   not   of   any   consequence   looking   to   the   finding
concurrently recorded by two courts. Thus, the findings of fact
recorded against the appellant and the other co­accused, who
have not come forward to file the appeal before the Court, are
neither perverse nor illegal so as to warrant interference by this
Court.  Therefore,  while  affirming  the  view  taken  by  the  High
Court and the Trial Court, we dismiss the appeal.
         ………..………………...J.
 (INDIRA BANERJEE)
      .….………………………J.
 (J.K. MAHESHWARI)
New Delhi;
July 05, 2022
12