REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1811­1812 OF 2022
VALLAL RCK           ...APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
M/S SIVA INDUSTRIES AND HOLDINGS 
LIMITED AND OTHERS    ...RESPONDENT(S)
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.These   appeals   challenge   the   common   judgment
dated   28th  January   2022   passed  by   the   learned  National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal, Chennai Bench, Chennai
(hereinafter referred to as the “NCLAT”) in Company Appeal
(AT)(CH)(Insolvency)   Nos.   211   and   212   of   2021,   thereby
dismissing the appeals filed by the present appellant, which
were   in   turn   filed,   challenging   the   two   orders   dated   12th
August 2021 passed by the learned National Company Law
Tribunal, Division Bench­II, Chennai (hereinafter referred to
1as the “NCLT”), thereby rejecting the application filed by the
Resolution Professional (“RP” for short) under Section 12A of
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (“IBC” for short)
read with Regulation 30A of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for Corporate
Persons) Regulations, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the
“2016 Regulations”), for withdrawal of the application filed
under Section 7 of the IBC in view of the Settlement Plan
submitted   by   the   appellant.   The   appellant   has   also
challenged the order passed by the learned NCLAT of the
even   date   vide   which   the   appeal   filed   by   the   present
appellant   against   the   order   passed   by   the   learned   NCLT
directing initiation of liquidation proceedings in respect of
M/s Siva Industries and Holdings Limited­respondent No.1
herein (hereinafter referred to as the “Corporate Debtor”),
was dismissed.
2.A short question that falls for consideration in the
present appeal is as to whether the adjudicating authority
(NCLT)   or   the   appellate   authority   (NCLAT)   can   sit   in   an
2appeal   over   the   commercial   wisdom   of   the   Committee   of
Creditors (hereinafter referred to as the “CoC”) or not.
3.The facts in brief giving rise to the present appeals
are as under:
IDBI   Bank   Limited   had   filed   an   application   under
Section 7 of the IBC for initiation of Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process (hereinafter referred to as the “CIRP”) in
respect of the Corporate Debtor.  The learned NCLT, vide its
order dated 4th July 2019, admitted the said application.  As
a result of which, CIRP in respect of the Corporate Debtor
was initiated.  The RP had presented a Resolution Plan before
the CoC, submitted by one M/s Royal Partners Investment
Fund Limited.   However, since the said Plan received only
60.90% votes of the CoC and could not meet the requirement
of receiving 66% votes, the said Plan could not be approved.
4.The RP, on 8th May 2020, filed an application being
IA/837/IB/2020 under Section 33(1)(a) of the IBC seeking
initiation of liquidation process of the Corporate Debtor.  The
appellant, who is the promoter of the Corporate Debtor, filed
3a settlement application being IA/647/IB/2020 before the
NCLT under Section 60(5) of the IBC, showing his willingness
to   offer   one­time   settlement   plan.     The   appellant   sought
necessary directions to the CoC to consider the terms of
Settlement Plan as proposed by him.   From the month of
October to December 2020, the 13th, 14th and 15th meetings
of the CoC were held to consider the Settlement Plan as
submitted by the appellant.  Deliberations took place in the
said meetings with regard to the said Settlement Plan and
the final settlement proposal which was submitted by the
appellant   came   to   be   considered   by   the   CoC   in   its   16th
meeting   held   on   18th  January   2021.     Initially,   the   said
Settlement   Plan   received   only   70.63%   votes.     However
subsequently,   one   of   the   Financial   Creditors   viz.
International   Assets   Reconstruction   Co.   Ltd.   (hereinafter
referred   to   as   “IARCL”)   having   voting   share   of   23.60%,
decided to approve the said Settlement Plan and intimated
the RP about the same.
5.Since the said Settlement Plan stood approved by
more than 90% voting share, the RP filed an application
4before the learned NCLT seeking necessary directions based
on the request of IARCL.   Vide its order dated 29th  March
2021,   the   learned   NCLT   ordered   the   RP   to   reconvene   a
meeting  of   CoC   and  place  the   e­mail  of   IARCL  before   it.
Accordingly, the 17th CoC meeting was convened on 1st April
2021, wherein the said Settlement Plan was approved with a
voting   majority   of   94.23%.     Accordingly,   the   RP   filed   an
application   being   MA/43/CHE/2021   in   IBA/453/2019
before the learned NCLT seeking withdrawal of CIRP initiated
against the Corporate Debtor in view of the approval of the
said Settlement Plan by CoC.
6.The learned NCLT, vide its order dated 12th August
2021, while holding that the said Settlement Plan was not a
settlement simpliciter under Section 12A of the IBC but a
“Business Restructuring Plan”, rejected the application for
withdrawal   of   CIRP   and   approval  of   the   Settlement   Plan.
Vide another order of even date, the learned NCLT initiated
liquidation   process   of   the   Corporate   Debtor   in
IA/837/IB/2020   as   well.     Being   aggrieved   thereby,   the
appellant preferred two appeals before the learned NCLAT.
5Vide the common impugned judgment dated 28th  January
2022, the same came to be dismissed. Hence, the present
appeals.
7.Notice   was   issued   by   this   Court   in   the   present
appeals on 11th March 2022.  While issuing notice, this Court
also granted stay of the impugned judgment.  Insofar as the
respondent   No.1   is   concerned,   no   one   appeared.     Shri
Abhishek Swaroop, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the respondent No.2 also does not wish to contest the matter.
As such, we could have very well allowed the appeals as
being uncontested.   However, since an important question
with regard to interpretation of Section 12A of the IBC arises,
we are inclined to consider the matter for deciding the said
issue.
8.We have heard Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned
Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant.
9.Dr. Singhvi submits that it is more than well­settled
that   the  adjudicating   authority   or  the   appellate  authority
cannot sit in an appeal over the commercial wisdom of CoC.
6He submitted that the CoC, having accepted the Settlement
Plan with the voting majority of 94.23%, the learned NCLT
and the learned NCLAT have grossly erred in rejecting the
Settlement Plan and withdrawal of CIRP.
10.Dr. Singhvi submitted that one of the main objects of
the IBC is permitting the Corporate Debtor to continue as an
on­going concern and at the same time, paying the dues of
the   creditors   to   the   maximum.     He   submits   that   the
impugned judgment dated 28th January 2022 passed by the
learned   NCLAT   and   the   orders   dated   12th  August   2021
passed by the learned NCLT are totally contrary to the spirit
behind the IBC.
11.For   considering   these   submissions,   it   will   be
apposite to refer to Section 12A of the IBC, which reads thus:
“12­A.   Withdrawal   of   application   admitted
under   Section   7,   9   or   10 .—The   Adjudicating
Authority may allow the withdrawal of application
admitted under Section 7 or Section 9 or Section
10, on an application made by the applicant with
the approval of ninety per cent. voting share of
the committee of creditors, in such manner as
may be specified.”
712.It is relevant to note that Section 12A of the IBC was
brought in the statute book vide  Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code (Second Amendment) Act, 2018 ( Act No. 26 of 2018).
The Statement of Objects and Reasons (for short “SOR”) of
the Act No. 26 of 2018 would reveal that after the IBC was
enacted in 2016, it had emerged that further fine tuning of
the   IBC   would   be   required.     The   Government   therefore
constituted   an   Insolvency   Law   Committee   (hereinafter
referred to as the “said Committee”) to review the functioning
and implementation of the IBC.  The SOR would further reveal
that   the   recommendations   of   the   said   Committee   were
examined by the Government and it was accordingly decided
to amend the IBC. One of the amendments proposed was for
making a provision for withdrawal of application for initiation
of   CIRP   admitted   by   Adjudicating   Authority.     It   was
recommended that such an exit should be allowed provided
the CoC approves such action by 90% voting share. 
13.It will be relevant to refer to Clause (vii) of the key
recommendations in the Report of the said Committee dated
26th March 2018, which reads thus:
8“(vii)     in   order   to   cater   to   exceptional
circumstances   warranting   withdrawal   of   an
application for CIRP post­admission, it has been
recommended to allow such exit provided the CoC
approves such action by ninety per cent of voting
share;”
14.It will also be relevant to refer to paragraph (29) of
the Report of the said Committee, which reads thus:
“29.   WITHDRAWAL   OF   CIRP   PROCEEDINGS
PURSUANT TO SETTLEMENT  
29.1 Under rule 8 of the CIRP Rules, the NCLT
may permit withdrawal of the application on a
request   by   the   applicant   before   its   admission.
However, there is no provision in the Code or the
CIRP   Rules   in   relation   to   permissibility   of
withdrawal post admission of a CIRP application.
It was observed by the Committee that there have
been instances where on account of settlement
between the applicant creditor and the corporate
debtor, judicial permission for withdrawal of CIRP
was   granted.   This   practice   was   deliberated   in
light of the objective of the Code as encapsulated
in the BLRC Report, that the design of the Code is
based on ensuring that “ all key stakeholders will
participate to collectively assess viability. The law
must   ensure   that   all   creditors   who   have   the
capability and the willingness to restructure their
liabilities must be part of the negotiation process.
The liabilities of all creditors who are not part of
the negotiation process must also be met in any
negotiated   solution. ”   Thus,   it   was   agreed   that
once   the   CIRP   is   initiated,   it   is   no   longer   a
proceeding   only   between   the   applicant   creditor
and the corporate debtor but is envisaged to be a
9proceeding involving all creditors of the debtor.
The intent of the Code is to discourage individual
actions   for   enforcement   and   settlement   to   the
exclusion of the general benefit of all creditors. 
29.2     On   a   review   of   the   multiple   NCLT   and
NCLAT judgments in this regard, the consistent
pattern that emerged was that a settlement may
be reached amongst all creditors and the debtor,
for the purpose of a withdrawal to be granted,
and   not   only   the   applicant   creditor   and   the
debtor. On this basis read with the intent of the
Code, the Committee unanimously agreed that
the relevant rules may be amended to provide
for   withdrawal   post   admission   if   the   CoC
approves of such action by a voting share of
ninety   per   cent.   It   was   specifically   discussed
that   rule   11   of   the   National   Company   Law
Tribunal Rules, 2016 may not be adopted for this
aspect of CIRP at this stage (as observed by the
Hon’ble   Supreme   Court   in   the   case   of   Uttara
Foods   and   Feeds   Private   Limited   v.   Mona
Pharmacem ) and even otherwise, as the issue can
be specifically addressed by amending rule 8 of
the CIRP Rules.” 
15.It could thus be seen from the Report of the said
Committee that, the said Committee had observed that there
have been instances where on account of settlement between
the   applicant   creditor   and   the   corporate   debtor,   judicial
permission for withdrawal of CIRP was granted.  The Report
would further reveal that it refers to Banking Law Reforms
10Committee   Report   which   emphasizes   that   the   law   must
ensure that all creditors who have the capability and the
willingness to restructure their liabilities must be part of the
negotiation process. It also emphasizes that the liabilities of
all creditors who are not part of the negotiation process must
also be met in any negotiated solution.  The said Committee
states   that   once   the   CIRP   is   initiated,   it   is   no   longer   a
proceeding   only   between   the   applicant   creditor   and   the
corporate debtor but is envisaged to be a proceeding involving
all   creditors   of   the   debtor.   The   intent   of   the   IBC   is   to
discourage individual actions for enforcement and settlement
to the exclusion of the general benefit of all creditors.   The
Report would further reveal that a settlement may be reached
amongst all creditors and the debtor, for the purpose of a
withdrawal to be granted, and not only the applicant creditor
and the debtor. The said Committee therefore recommended
that   the   relevant   rules   may   be   amended   to   provide   for
withdrawal post admission if the CoC approves of such action
by a voting share of ninety per cent. 
1116.It could thus be seen that Section 12A of the IBC was
brought   in   the   statute   book   on   the   basis   of   the   said
Committee’s Report. It could be noticed that though by the
Amendment Act No. 26 of 2018, the voting share of 75% of
CoC for approval of the Resolution Plan was brought down to
66%,   Section   12A   of   the   IBC   which   was   brought   in   the
statute book by the same amendment, requires the voting
share of 90% of CoC for approval of withdrawal of CIRP.  It
could thus clearly be seen that a more stringent provision
has been made insofar as withdrawal of CIRP is concerned.
17.It is further to be noted that after Section 12A of the
IBC was brought in the statute book, Regulation 30A of the
2016 Regulations came to be inserted vide notification dated
3rd  July   2018.     The   same   came   to   be   substituted   vide
notification dated 25th July 2019.  Regulation 30A of the 2016
Regulations reads thus:
“30­A.   Withdrawal   of   application .—(1)   An
application   for   withdrawal   under   Section   12­A
may be made to the Adjudicating Authority—
(a)   before   the   constitution   of   the
committee,   by   the   applicant   through
the interim resolution professional;
12(b)   after   the   constitution   of   the
committee,   by   the   applicant   through
the interim resolution professional or
the resolution professional, as the case
may be:
Provided   that   where   the   application   is   made
under clause ( b) after the issue of invitation for
expression of interest under Regulation 36­A, the
applicant   shall   state   the   reasons   justifying
withdrawal after issue of such invitation.
(2) The application under sub­regulation (1) shall
be   made   in   Form   FA   of   the   Schedule
accompanied by a bank guarantee—
(a)   towards   estimated   expenses
incurred   on   or   by   the   interim
resolution professional for purposes of
Regulation 33, till the date of filing of
the application under clause ( a) of sub­
regulation (1); or
(b)   towards   estimated   expenses
incurred for purposes of clauses ( aa),
(ab), (c) and (d) of Regulation 31, till
the   date   of   filing   of   the   application
under clause ( b) of sub­regulation (1).
(3) Where an application for withdrawal is under
clause   ( a)   of   sub­regulation   (1),   the   interim
resolution   professional   shall   submit   the
application   to   the   Adjudicating   Authority   on
behalf of the applicant, within three days of its
receipt.
(4) Where an application for withdrawal is under
clause   (b)   of   sub­regulation   (1),   the   committee
shall consider the application, within seven days
of its receipt.
(5)   Where   the   application   referred   to   in   sub­
regulation (4) is approved by the committee with
13ninety   percent   voting   share,   the   resolution
professional shall submit such application along
with   the   approval   of   the   committee,   to   the
Adjudicating Authority on behalf of the applicant,
within three days of such approval.
(6)   The   Adjudicating   Authority   may,   by   order,
approve   the   application   submitted   under   sub­
regulation (3) or (5).
(7) Where the application is approved under sub­
regulation   (6),   the   applicant   shall   deposit   an
amount, towards the actual expenses incurred for
the purposes referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b)
of sub­regulation (2) till the date of approval by
the Adjudicating Authority, as determined by the
interim   resolution   professional   or   resolution
professional, as the case may be, within three
days of such approval, in the bank account of the
corporate   debtor,   failing   which   the   bank
guarantee received under sub­regulation (2) shall
be invoked, without prejudice to any other action
permissible   against   the   applicant   under   the
Code.”
18.A perusal of the said Regulation would reveal that
where an application for withdrawal under Section 12A of the
IBC is made after the  constitution of  the  Committee, the
same   has   to   be   made   through   the   interim   resolution
professional or the resolution professional, as the case may
be.  The application has to be made in Form­FA.  It further
provides that when an application is made after the issue of
invitation for expression of interest under Regulation 36A, the
14applicant   is   required   to   state   the   reasons   justifying
withdrawal of the same.  The RP is required to place such an
application  for   consideration   before   the  Committee.     Only
after such an application is approved by the Committee with
90% voting share, the RP shall submit the same along with
the approval of the Committee to the adjudicating authority.
It could thus be seen that a detailed procedure is prescribed
under Regulation 30A of the 2016 Regulations as well.
19.In the case of  Swiss Ribbons Privated Limited and
Another   v.   Union   of   India   and   Others1,   one   of   the
challenges made was with regard to validity of Section 12A of
the IBC.  It was argued that the figure of 90% voting share
was   arbitrary.   It   was   the   contention   that   though   the
withdrawal was just and proper, the CoC could exercise the
power arbitrarily to reject such a settlement. While rejecting
the said contention, this Court observed thus:
“83. The   main   thrust   against   the   provision   of
Section 12­A is the fact that ninety per cent of the
Committee of Creditors has to allow withdrawal.
This high threshold has been explained in the ILC
Report as all financial creditors have to put their
heads   together   to   allow   such   withdrawal   as,
1 (2019) 4 SCC 17
15ordinarily,   an   omnibus   settlement
involving  all creditors ought, ideally, to be entered
into. This explains why ninety per cent, which is
substantially all the financial creditors, have to
grant their approval to an individual withdrawal
or settlement. In any case, the figure of ninety per
cent, in the absence of anything further to show
that it is arbitrary, must pertain to the domain of
legislative policy, which has been explained by
the Report (supra). Also, it is clear, that under
Section   60   of   the   Code,   the   Committee   of
Creditors   do   not   have   the   last   word   on   the
subject. If the Committee of Creditors arbitrarily
rejects   a   just   settlement   and/or   withdrawal
claim, NCLT, and thereafter,  NCLAT can always set
aside such decision under Section 60 of the Code.
For all these reasons, we are of the view that
Section 12­A also passes constitutional muster.”  
20.It could thus be seen that this Court has found that
if   the   CoC   arbitrarily   rejects   a   just   settlement   and/or
withdrawal   claim,   the   learned   NCLT   and   thereafter   the
learned NCLAT can always set aside such decision under the
provisions of the IBC.
21.This Court has consistently held  that the commercial
wisdom of the CoC has been given paramount status without
any judicial intervention for ensuring completion of the stated
processes within the timelines prescribed by the IBC. It has
been held that there is an intrinsic assumption, that financial
16creditors   are   fully   informed   about   the   viability   of   the
corporate debtor and feasibility of the proposed resolution
plan. They act on the basis of thorough examination of the
proposed resolution plan and assessment made by their team
of experts.  A reference in this respect could be made to the
judgments of this Court in the cases of   K. Sashidhar v.
Indian   Overseas   Bank   and   Others2,  Committee   of
Creditors   of   Essar   Steel   India   Limited   through
Authorised   Signatory   v.   Satish   Kumar   Gupta   and
Others3,  Maharashtra   Seamless   Limited   v.
Padmanabhan   Venkatesh   and   Others4,   Kalpraj
Dharamshi and Another v. Kotak Investment Advisors
Limited and Another5, and Jaypee Kensington Boulevard
Apartments   Welfare   Association   and   Others   v.   NBCC
(India) Limited and Others6.
2 (2019) 12 SCC 150
3 (2020) 8 SCC 531
4 (2020) 11 SCC 467
5 (2021) 10 SCC 401
6 (2022) 1 SCC 401
1722.No doubt that the aforesaid observations have been
made by this Court while considering the powers of the CoC
while granting its approval to the Resolution Plan.
23.As already stated hereinabove, the provisions under
Section 12A of the IBC have been made more stringent as
compared to Section 30(4) of the IBC.  Whereas under Section
30(4) of the IBC, the voting share of CoC for approving the
Resolution Plan is 66%, the requirement under Section 12A
of the IBC for withdrawal of CIRP is 90%.
24.When 90% and more of the creditors, in their wisdom
after due deliberations, find that it will be in the interest of all
the stake­holders to permit settlement and withdraw CIRP, in
our   view,   the   adjudicating   authority   or   the   appellate
authority cannot sit in an appeal over the commercial wisdom
of CoC. The interference would be warranted only when the
adjudicating authority or the appellate authority finds the
decision   of   the   CoC   to   be   wholly   capricious,   arbitrary,
irrational and   de hors  the provisions of the statute or the
Rules.
1825.In the present case, the proceedings of the 13th, 14th
and 15th meetings of CoC would clearly show that there were
wide deliberations amongst the members of the CoC while
considering   the   Settlement   Plan   as   submitted   by   the
appellant.  Not only that, the proceedings would also reveal
that after suggestions were made by some of the members of
the   CoC,   suitable   amendments   were   carried   out   in   the
Settlement Plan by the appellant.  One of the members of the
CoC having voting share of 23.60%, though initially opposed
the Settlement Plant, subsequently decided to support the
same.   Accordingly, the NCLT itself, vide order dated 29th
March 2021, directed the RP to reconvene the CoC meeting.
As per the directions of the NCLT, on 1st April 2021, the 17th
meeting of the CoC was reconvened, wherein the Settlement
Plan was approved by 94.23% votes.  
26.It is thus clear that the decision of the CoC was
taken after the members of the CoC, had due deliberation to
consider the pros and cons of the Settlement Plan and took a
decision   exercising   their   commercial   wisdom.     We   are
therefore   of   the   considered   view   that   neither   the   learned
19NCLT nor the learned NCLAT were justified in not giving due
weightage to the commercial wisdom of CoC.
27.This Court has, time and again, emphasized the need
for minimal judicial interference by the NCLAT and NCLT in
the framework of IBC.  We may refer to the recent observation
of this Court made in the case of  Arun Kumar Jagatramka
v. Jindal Steel and Power Limited and Another7:
“95.  ….However, we do take this opportunity to
offer   a   note   of   caution   for   NCLT   and  NCLAT,
functioning   as   the   adjudicatory   authority   and
appellate   authority   under   the   IBC   respectively,
from   judicially   interfering   in   the   framework
envisaged   under   the   IBC.   As   we   have   noted
earlier in the judgment, the IBC was introduced
in   order   to   overhaul   the   insolvency   and
bankruptcy   regime   in   India.   As   such,   it   is   a
carefully considered and well thought out piece of
legislation   which   sought   to   shed   away   the
practices   of   the   past.   The   legislature   has   also
been working hard to ensure that the efficacy of
this   legislation   remains   robust   by   constantly
amending   it   based   on   its   experience.
Consequently, the need for judicial intervention
or   innovation   from   NCLT   and  NCLAT should   be
kept at its bare minimum and should not disturb
the foundational principles of the IBC…..”
28.In the result, we pass the following order:
7 (2021) 7 SCC 474
20(i)The appeals are allowed;
(ii)The   impugned  judgment   dated  28th  January  2022
delivered by the learned NCLAT in Company Appeal
(AT)(CH)(Insolvency) Nos. 211 and 212 of 2021 and
the orders dated 12th  August 2021 passed by the
learned   NCLT   in   MA/43/CHE/2021   in
IBA/453/2019   and   in   IA/837/IB/2020   in
IBA/453/2019 are quashed and set aside; and 
(iii)The   application   bearing   No.   MA/43/CHE/2021   in
IBA/453/2019 filed by the Resolution Professional
before the learned NCLT for withdrawal of CIRP is
allowed.
29.Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of
in the above terms.  No order as to costs.
…..….......................J.
[B.R. GAVAI]
             
    …….........................J.
[HIMA KOHLI]
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 03, 2022.
21